Abstract
The project studies and investigates the characteristic evaluation of CNTFETs. It has
two main sections:one is library comparison; another is ACCNT structure analysis.
Firstly,because CNTFET is a most promising device in nanometer realm integrate
circuit,library design and analysis are important for future related work in industrial
areas. In this project, the whole CNTFET library has been set up. And Stanford
CNTFETs model library compare with BSIM4 MOSFET model and PTM MOSFET
model library in propagation delay,power consumption and leakage current aspects.
BSIM4 model is current existing model,while PTM model is a predictive model.
Using these two different kinds of models, the characteristic of CNTFET library has
been evaluated with current and future model roundly. Extensive simulations have
been studied,which show that CNTFETs library can perform better characteristics
than the current MOSFETs and future MOSFETs models. For example,in tempera-
ture influence,leakage current,propagation delay,static properties and VTC aspects,
CNTFET is superior to MOSFET. Moreover,tubes also influence CNTFET charac-
teristic. More tubes will lead to have less propagation delay. The related simulation
study and analysis has been given in this thesis.
Secondly,previous researchers propose a novel approach to increase metallic tube
tolerance without removing metallic tubes in CNTFET. This is named ACCNT. The
project also focuses on ACCNT structure evaluation and analysis, such as effect
on three important parameters(delay,leakage,power) in different ACCNT structure.
Moreover,with the popularity of this new design methodology,the analysis on metal-
lic tubes in ACCNT structure looks extremely important. The metallic tubes influ-
ence has been studied and researched in this thesis as well.
Accomplished task:
• Analysis of Ion/Ioff ratio in different ACCNT structure,static properties in dif-
ferent input patterns,VTC in CNTFET,temperature influence.
• Building the Stanford CNTFET library(19 logic gates) and comparing with
BSIM4,PTM MOSFET library in delay,power and leakage.
• Analysis of tube numbers influence on delay,leakage and power consumption.
• Analysis metallic tube influence on ACCNT structure.
• Design full adder by using ACCNT structure.
Keywords: CNTFET library, ACCNT, metallic tube tolerance, propagation delay,
power consumption, leakage current, tube numbers.
1
Declaration
A dissertation submitted to the University of Bristol in accordance with the require-
ments of the degree of Master of Science in the Faculty of Engineering. It has not
been submitted for any other degree or diploma of any examining body. Except
where specifically acknowledged, it is all the work of the Author.
Junchen Lu, September 2011
3
Contents
1 Introduction 6
1.1 Aims and objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
1.2 Structure of thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
2 Background 10
2.1 Background of MOS Field-Effect-Transistors and scaling down of
transistor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.1.1 Advantages and challenges of transistor scaling down . . . . 10
2.1.2 Supply voltage and threshold voltage trends on scaling down
of Transistor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
2.2 Background of Carbon Nano-Tube . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.2.1 Types of Carbon Nano-Tube . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.2.2 Approaches of production in Carbon Nano-Tube(CNT) . . . 14
2.2.3 Applications of Carbon Nano-Tube . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.3 Carbon Nano-tube Field-Effect Transistors (CNTFETs) . . . . . . . 15
2.3.1 Tube configuration method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.3.2 ACCNT design method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3 Methodology 25
3.1 Models been used in project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.1.1 CNTFET model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.1.2 MOSFET model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.2 Method on comparing MOSFET and CNTFET on different parts . . 26
3.3 Method on ACCNT analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4 Result 29
4.1 Simulation results and assessment on Carbon Nano-tube Field-Effect
Transistors (CNTFETs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.1.1 Voltage transfer characteristic for CNTFET and MOSFET . 30
4.1.2 Temperature influence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.1.3 Static properties of complementary CMOS and CNT gate . 33
4.1.4 Ion Ioff of CNTFET . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.2 Delay,power,leakage of MOSFET and CNTFET . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.2.1 Calculation of delay,power consumption,leakage current . . 37
4.2.2 Load capacitance influence on BSIM4 MOSFET model and
Stanford CNTFET model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
4.2.3 Load capacitance influence on PTM MOSFET model and
Stanford CNTFET model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
4.2.4 CNTFET library with different number of tubes . . . . . . . 45
4.2.5 Conclusion of CNTFET library characterization . . . . . . . 47
5 Simulation based on asymmetrically correlated CNT (ACCNT) 50
5.1 ACCNT design analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
5.2 Metallic tubes influence on leakage in ACCNT structure . . . . . . 52
5.3 Design full-adder based on ACCNT structure . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
4
6 Conclusion 56
6.1 CNTFET library . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
6.2 ACCNT analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
7 Future work 58
Appendix 62
5
Library Characterization and Analysis of
Carbon Nanotube-Based Logic
September 29, 2011
1 Introduction
With the innovation of products in microelectronic fields,researchers realize the im-
portance of integrated circuit(IC) in different application areas. From our daily
life to professional industrial fields,IC design becomes ubiquitous. The IC design
involves in many electronic devices which are familiar by people, such as resis-
tors,capacitances and transistors.
In the past,researchers focused on scaling the feature sizes of integrate circuits.
This approach was known as a significant method to improve running speed,power
dissipation and integration density. In 1965,Gordon Moore’s prediction said that
the transistor number will have exponentially grown—the number of transistor will
double every year[1]. Until a few years ago,this law was still keep. But the situation
has been varied recently. Figure1-1 shows the trends of the number of transistor from
1970-2010.
Figure 1-1 Transistor Counts from 1970-2010[2]
6
Transistor plays a quite important role in the integrate circuit. Nowadays,it is
commonly used in chips. Because of the high requirement in circuit function and
performance,more and more transistors need to be integrated in same area chips.
Current technology already made the small size transistor(nanometer region). After
the invention of nano-tube,MOSFET has gone into a submicrion/nano region(below
than 65nm). Recently,the smallest size is 16nm in channel length,this nanometer
region transistor has been predicted as a potential device.[3].
However,the shrink of channel length in transistor will bring problems. When
the physical length of gate is below than 65nm(goes into nanometer region),the ap-
proaches of parameter calculation are different from traditional transistors[1]. The
reason is that the transfer time of carriers to cross the gate channel is proportional to
gate length(Sumit Kumar,2008)[4]. Therefore small gate length would have small
gate delay and small interconnection dimension. Although the transistor scaling
would cause the reducing delay and low cost,some performance problems still exist
which will be described in this project. The smaller the gate length, the harder to
obey the MOORE’S LAW which was a rule for transistor development. The figure1-
2 shows the change of transistor size in 1990s. Currently,the technology already
reach sub-30nm realm.
Figure 1-2 Scaling of transistor size in 1990s[5]
Because of the difficulties caused by manufacturing of small size transistor, re-
searchers pay their attention on a new type of field-effect transistor which is named
carbon nano-tube field-effect transistor(CNTFET).CNTFETs characterization is sim-
ilar to MOSFETs and in some behaviors (propagation delay,leakage,power consump-
tion) it is better than MOSFETs.Thus in some areas it can replace traditional MOS-
FETs. At the same time,lots of improvement are used to receive better features in
MOSFET. For example, 16nm and 22nm PTM low-power and high-performance
model have been used in 2008. So we can see that nowadays transistors are already
go into a nanometer realm.
7
Due to the high requirement of CNTFETs in the near future,CNTFET technol-
ogy is one focus in nowadays technology development. Research founds that the
chirality of carbon nano-tubes would cause two different tubes:metallic tubes and
semiconducting tubes. Semiconducting tubes have better features in gate control,but
metallic tubes will cause the out-of control of transistor. So researches on analysis of
the tube influence and metallic tube tolerance are important in future development.
This project will focus on the CNTFETs library characterization analysis,the in-
fluence of metallic tubes and improved circuit structure.
1.1 Aims and objectives
The main objectives of this project is analysis the characterization of CNTFETs,
comparing with conventional MOSFETs (two different models–BSIM4 and PTM),
benefits and drawbacks of the new transistor evaluation. The steps are listed at below:
• Basic simulation on single CNTFET,such as ION/IOFF ratio evaluation,static
properties,voltage transfer characteristic.
• Using Stanford 32nm CNTFET model to assemble the whole library which
contains 19 logic gates,such as inverter,and,aoi21,mux0n,min,flip-flop and so
on.
• In same environment parameters, Compare the CNTFETs library with the
MOSFETs library(BSIM4 and PTM) in propagation delay, leakage current,
temperature and power consumption aspect.
• Evaluating the influence of tube numbers in different CNTFETs logic gates.
• Analysis the structure of ACCNT design,such as the influence of metallic tubes
in ACCNT structure and metallic tube tolerance.
• Using ACCNT design methodology to design full-adder.
In each step,extensive simulations need to be done and the simulation results has
been analysed.The implementation of project is based on Matlab and Hspice.Hspice
can be used to calculate the current or power in certain transistor at the whole circuit
and get intuitional figures.
1.2 Structure of thesis
This thesis has seven chapters:
• Introduction presents the challenge in microelectronics and the trend of nowa-
days transistor.
• Chapter2 introduces the fundamental knowledge of MOSFET and CNTFET. In
MOSFET part,the main study will concentrate on MOSFET scaling down,such
as the benefits and drawbacks caused by small size MOSFETs.In CNTFETs
part, some introduction about the structure of carbon nano-tube and CNTFET
will be given. Moreover, the negative of CNTFETs has been shown, and the
8
approaches to solve this problem in other papers are described in this chapter.
At last,writer evaluate the benefits and drawbacks of these two methods(tube
configuration and ACCNT design).
• Chapter3 refers to the methodology used in this project. The models used in
CNTFET and MOSFET library have been explained.
• Chapter4 is the basic simulation which based on CNTFETs, such as analysis
the VTC, temperature influence,Ion/Ioff ratio. Moreover, this chapter includes
building the CNTFETs library and comparing with the BSIM4 MOSFETs li-
brary and the PTM MOSFETs library, and analysis the influence of tube num-
bers.
• Chapter5 is related to ACCNT design. Firstly, analysis the metallic tube tol-
erance of this structure has been evaluated. Metallic tube influence has also
been referred in this chapter. But this analysis has been done in an equiva-
lent way. Because the Stanford model used in this project is an ideal model.
Finally,Using this structure to design full adder.
• Chapter6, conclusion to CNTFETs library characteristic and ACCNT charac-
teristic.
• Chapter7, future work related to solve the current problems and the aspects
which need to be improved.
9
2 Background
2.1 Background of MOS Field-Effect-Transistors and scaling down
of transistor
In this part, a brief introduction of MOS Field-Effect-Transistors(MOSFET) has been
given. MOSFET is an important part on wafer. Usually,the MOSFET can be used
to make amplifying and switching signals which are common devices in the micro-
electronics field,such as using in differential amplifier, current mirror. In MOSFET,
if a gate voltage existed, a conducting channel between the source and drain terminal
can be formed. The difference between NMOSFET and PMOSFET is the different
channel type. NMOS has a N-channel between drain and source,while PMOS has
a P-channel. The high input voltage will lead to N-MOSFET turn on,while the low
input voltage will cause P-MOSFET turn on. MOSFET is the most popular transistor
in integrate circuits, and it can replace the place of BJT[1].
With the precise requirements of low leakage,power consumption and propaga-
tion delay, some of traditional MOSFETs can not match the desired requirements.
New materials have been used to improve the corresponding performances. "the
high k dielectric material is used to replace S iO2 in gate insulator to receive low
power consumption"(quoted from Wikipedia). Moreover, some companies combine
the high k dielectric and the metal in gate for 45nm transistors.(cited from Wikipedia)
Because of the high integration requirements and the multi-function implementa-
tion,a number of researches have been done on scaling down of transistors. But with
the scaling down of transistor size, new problems may appear, such as increased
leakage current and large parametric variation[1]. Therefore,a new material which is
named Carbon Nano-tube attracts more people’s eyes.
2.1.1 Advantages and challenges of transistor scaling down
With the development of technology, the size of transistor is scaling down. The small
size transistor has a short channel length. Thus,the equivalent resistance of channel
is reduced. The low resistance allows more current through the channel compared
with the previous transistor. Although the width of channel influence the equivalent
resistance of channel,this problem can be solved easily by reducing the value of unit
resistance. Moreover,the scaling down of transistor means reducing the area of gate
terminal which can reduce the gate terminal capacitance effectively. It is expected
that the fabrication costs per transistor would be reduced. Because the number of
transistor per wafer was increased.
But side effects still exist with scaling down of transistor. Producing MOSFETs
with channel length less than 1u is a challenge. Because problems such as large gate-
oxide leakage,increased influence on interconnect capacitance and process variation
would appear.
As the thickness of transistor goes into nanometer level(about 1.2nm),the tunnel-
ing effect occurs which would cause large leakage current and power consumption.
In order to solve this problem,larger dielectric constant insulators are used in gate-
oxide(such as Hafnium and Zirconium). High dielectric constant allows a thicker
gate layer while keep high capacitance. Thick gate oxide layer can reduce quantum
10
tunneling current,so the leakage current would be reduced.(cited from Wikipedia)
The switching speed of logic gate is related to the gate capacitance.The gate
capacitance will be reduced with the scaling of the transistor size.Because of the
minimizing of transistor, more transistors can be fabricated in same size wafer. So
the interconnect capacitance becomes a most important reason in switching speed
control.
As the transistors are smaller than before,the probability of process variations
would increase. So it would influence the transistor characteristic. This variations
make that the designer’s work becomes more difficult than before. From the draw-
backs of scaling down transistor,we know that traditional transistor can not satisfy
current technology demands. So an advanced transistor which is named CNTFET
has an exciting future.
2.1.2 Supply voltage and threshold voltage trends on scaling down of Transis-
tor
As the channel length(Lch) scaling down, the supply voltage,threshold voltage,gate-
oxide thickness were reduced[6]. The trends are shown in figure at below.In order to
keep the active power in a reasonable region, the supply voltage should be decreased
in order to limited the short channel effect and hot carrier effect[7].The reasons are
explained in Equation2-1.
Pac = (CswVdd2/2) f (2-1)
Pdissipation = IgVdd (2-2)
Csw is total switching capacitance, f is clock frequency,Pdissipation is power dissipa-
tion, Ig is total gate leakage[6].
In advanced technology, the Csw would be increased. This is because of Moore’s
Law which allows more transistors can be fabricated in same wafer. Moreover, the
clock frequency is higher than before. So the direct way to decrease active power
is using relatively low supply voltage. Moreover,the reducing of power supply will
reduce the power dissipation at the same time. Equation2-2 shows this reason.
Compare with the supply voltage,the threshold voltage decrease slightly. The
reason for this phenomenon is inverse subthreshold slope which is a definition that
tells how well it shut off.
S = ln(10)
nKBT
q
(2-3)
So threshold voltage isn’t relate with the channel length of transistor. But it would
be influenced by the thermally activated diffusion. So the Vth just has a slight re-
duction. Importantly,the threshold voltage can not less than 0.3-0.4V,because of the
extremely high leakage current and large delay caused by the small threshold volt-
age. Now some methods are used to solve small threshold voltage problem,such
as multiple-threshold voltage device, dynamic-threshold devices[8]. The multiple-
threshold voltage method let circuit use low threshold voltage to increase speed in
critical path,but using high threshold voltage in any other places.
Moreover,the oxide thickness also has been minimized. Because of the relevant
direct tunneling, the minimum value is 3nm for silicon oxidation[7]. The changes of
Vdd,Vth,gate-oxide thickness are shown in Figure2-1.
11
Figure 2-1 Vdd,Vth,gate-oxide thickness(tox) trends in channel length[6]
But when the channel length of transistors are below than 100nm, the ways of
reducing supply voltage,oxide thickness and raising doping degree in channel would
not bring much improve. Because high doping concentration cause bad transistor
performance and carrier confinement,then would cause higher Vth than theoretical
value.[7][9][10]
So researching on the new transistor(CNTFET) still looks very important. In
next part, writer will compare the Voltage Transfer Characteristic of CNTFET with
different channel length MOSFET.
2.2 Background of Carbon Nano-Tube
"MOORE’S LAW states that the number of transistors per integrated circuit doubles
every year"(quoted from[5]). After the nanometer size transistor has been achieved,
making transistor which smaller than nanometer region will be more difficult than
before. Moreover,the MOORE’S LAW becomes hard to obey. The reasons can
be divided into two sections. One challenge is to overcome the feature of current
MOSFET, such as low delay, low leakage current, low power consumption. extend
information processing is another challenge. It can be optimized by using advanced
architectural method. Nowadays,new technologies are created to improve the tran-
sistor characteristics. Such as, metal-gate/high- stacks[11], strained-Si channels[12],
nonplanar fully depleted Tri-gate CMOS transistor architecture[13].
12
Nowadays,carbon nano-tube field-effect transistors (CNTFETs) utmost attracts
researchers to notice. In this paper, a logic circuit CNTFET library will be designed.
Moreover, writer will compare the characterization between carbon nano-tube field-
effect transistors and conventional transistors in time delay, power consumption,
leakage current aspects, then analysis ACCNT design(metallic CNT tolerant design).
"Carbon nano-tubes are carbon’s allotropes which are constructed in a cylindrical
nano-structure"(quoted from Wikipedia). It has the characteristics of electro conduc-
tivity, tensile strength, thermal conductivity, kinetics and nano machines[14]. Due to
its unique characteristic,different types of carbon nanotube structure can be formed
and all of them would have the unique characterization.
2.2.1 Types of Carbon Nano-Tube
Currently,single-walled nanotubes (SWNT), Multi-walled nanotubes (MWNT), nan-
otorus are most popular types in CNT field.
The structure of a SWNT looks like its name. It is a cylinder structure which
was formed by a single layer of grapheme. The SWNT’s diameter is close to 1nm.
Compare with the diameter,this structure has a long length which is 1,000,000 times
longer than diameter[14]. Because of its unique structure,SWNT has a excellent
electric properties. The band gap of SWNT(from 0 to 2eV) is larger than MWNT[14].
The metallic characteristics can be used in transistor. Nowadays,because of the de-
veloping manufacturing technology,the price of SWNT is much lower than before.
In this project,CNTFET model we used is a single-walled nano-tube structure.
Figure 2-2 SWNT structure(a), MWNT structure(b)(figure from google)
Another structure is Multi-walled nanotubes.This structure has multiple layers
of graphite. The behaviors of MWNT are similar to SWNT,but MWNT just show
metallic behavior.
Nanotorus is a carbon nanotube which connected into a ring structure. Because
of this structure,it has its unique behaviors which are different from other struc-
tures,such as magnetic movement and thermal stability[14]. These properties can
be used in magnet field.
13
In different fields, we need to make use of their different characteristics. Based
on the behaviors and characteristics,it can be used in different industrial area.
Figure 2-3 Structure of Nanotorus(figure from google)
Figure2-2,2-3 show the structure of these three kinds of carbon nano-tube.
2.2.2 Approaches of production in Carbon Nano-Tube(CNT)
Currently, there are three main approaches to produce the nanotube in large numbers.
One is arc discharge, another one is laser ablation, the last one is chemical vapor
deposition (CVD)[14].
Arc discharge: In this approach, carbon was put in a heat environment,then the
carbon will be evaporated. After these steps,the carbon nanotube was formed. This
oldest approach still plays an important role in SWNT and MWNT fabrication. But
it has some drawbacks, such as low yield(only 30  tubes can be formed at one
time).[15]
Laser ablation: Carbon nanotube was evaporated by a laser in a high tempera-
ture room which is filled with reactive gas. Then nano-tubes would be grown on
the cooler surfaces of the reactor [15]. Laser ablation is the main approach to gen-
erate SWNT. This method can produce about 70 percent nanotubes which have a
controllable diameter. The diameter is determined by the temperature. However,this
approach is more expensive than others.[15]
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD): A nickel, cobalt or iron substrate put and
heated in the reactor,then ammonia gas and carbon gas are injected into the reactor.
Finally, carbon nanotubes would grow on the substrate. CVD is the most popular way
to generate CNT in commercial field. The benefits of this method is high price/unit
ratio and controllable CNT growing place.[15]
2.2.3 Applications of Carbon Nano-Tube
Because of the chirality,strength and flexibility of carbon nanotube, nano-tube can
be used in many fields in nowadays.
14
Transistor The most familiar productions which are made of CNT is the CNT-
FETs. This transistor has the ability of digital switching using single electrons[16].
Ballistic CNTFET with high-k dielectric gate and ohmic metal contacts has higher
Ion than traditional MOSFET(about 20 times higher). But the problem is hard to
produce in a great quantity
Electrical cables Because of its metal characteristic, this material can be used in
electrical wires. This kind of wires have high conductivity which is much better than
cooper.
Solar cells This battery is made of CNT and buckyballs. Buckyballs can not trans-
fer the electrons,but it can attract electrons. Then the sun can stimulate high polymer
and help buckyballs attract electrons. At last,nanotube act as a wire to transfer the
electrons.
Medical fields It can be used to cure disease. CNT can be inserted in cells which
have cancer disease. After being expose to waves,the CNT would be heated and it
can kill the surrounding cells.
Others Currently,CNT has been used in lots of field, such as cloth material,space
field and so on.
2.3 Carbon Nano-tube Field-Effect Transistors (CNTFETs)
Carbon Nano-tube Field-Effect Transistors(CNTFET) is a new kind of transistor
which use array of carbon nano-tube to replace the silicon which used in conven-
tional transistor (MOSFET). CNTFETs(created in 1988) have been proved that it
would have a good future in next few years[17].
Currently,four kinds of CNTFET are very popular which are top-gate CNTFETs,
back-gate CNTFETs,wrap-around gate CNTFETs and suspended CNTFETs. From
the name of different CNTFETs, people can easily understand the structure of them.
Top-gate CNTFET is the transistor which has a thin gate on the top of tubes. The
benefit of this structure is that it would have high electric field even use a low gate
voltage. This is because of the thin gate it has. Back-gate CNTFET which has
the gate at bottom(under nanotubes) is the earliest CNTFET. In 2008,wrap-around
gate CNTFET has been found[18]. In this structure the gate material wrapped the
nanotube. This structure can reduce the leakage current effectively and even increase
Ion/Ioff. The last one is suspended CNTFETs. In this device, tubes are suspended
over the substrate. It has the benefits of reducing contact between tubes and substrate.
But problems still exist, such as lack of material to make this transistor and only used
in small size transistor. Because long tubes will curve in the middle,this would be
easy to touch the metal contact.
Compare with MOSFET,the I-V characteristics are similar,which also need posi-
tive Vg to turn on the N-CNTFET and negative Vg to turn on P-CNTFET. Moreover,
15
Ids also influence by Vgs and Vds which can be calculated in the equation at below
Ids =
2qkT
pi ? h [F0(
US F
kT
) ? F0(UDFkT )] (2-4)
US F = EF ? q(VS C) (2-5)
UDF = EF ? q(VS C) ? q(VDS ) (2-6)
Where F0 is fermi-dirac integral of order 0,k is Boltzmann constant,T is temperature,h
is planck constant,VDS is self-consistent voltage[19].
In this project,CNTFET of Stanford model is used.It is a top-gate CNTFETs. The
structure of Stanford model are shown at below. CNT chirality in 32nm Stanford
model is semiconducting characteristic. So this model is treated as an ideal one.
Figure 2-4 CNTFET layout and side view
Compare with the traditional MOSFET,CNTFET act as an ideal substitute in the
same field. As the technology scaling down,traditional MOEFET suffered from large
parametric variations and increasing leakage current. While CNTFET already deal
with the issue,and it has a similar operation principle and device structure. Moreover,
it has excellent current capabilities.
In reality,due to different chirality of tubes, metallic tubes would exist in CNT-
FETs inevitably. Although the metallic characteristic has its benefits when we use
it in wires, it would cause the gate of transistor out of control. So the way which
is popular at before is removing metallic tubes. New technologies used to generate
small percent of metallic tubes are Plasma CVD method and General CVD method.
Plasma CVD method would has about 11  metallic and 89±2.3  semiconducting
tubes. General CVD method would has about 30  metallic and 70  semiconducting
tubes[20]. "A newest Preferential Synthesis can fabricate CNT with just 4  metallic
tubes and 96  semiconducting tubes"(Qu, Nano Letters 2008).
Because of the two different kinds of tubes in CNTFET,CNTFET displays dif-
ferent behavior. Metallic CNTs’ behavior looks like metallic wires. So it will cause
ohmic-short between source and drain. In this situation, the current only depends
on the drain-source voltage which would not influenced by the gate voltage. Semi-
conducting CNTs exhibits a current which controlled by gate-voltage and it would
offer high ON-OFF ration(about 10e6)[21].In order to achieve large current drive and
small propagation delay, more tubes are needed. So the possibility of metallic tubes
16
would increase which was not good for the function of CNTFET. The experimental
data[21] shows CNTFET with a mix of semiconducting tube and metallic tube has
an extremely low on-off ratio. Because the current would not control by gate voltage
if metallic tube exist. Then it would cause high OFF current.
In order to solve the problem of metallic tubes,electrical burning and chemical
etching methods are used. But other problems would appear by using these methods.
Current-induced electrical burning technique is not good for area efficiency, because
it needs space of contact between each nano-tube[15]. The theory of chemical etch-
ing technique is removing tubes which have a certain tube diameter[15]. Because
of the different diameter in metallic tubes,chemical etching method will remove all
metallic tubes, also would remove some semiconducting tubes which need to re-
main.The semiconducting tubes in transistor can reduce the switching time of logic
gate,so in CNTFET fabrication we need to protect the semiconducting tubes.
Moreover, another kind of idea has been mentioned,that is changing the transis-
tor structure or circuit structure. Using different tube configuration belongs to the
approach of changing transistor structure. Another method is ACCNT design which
is a methodology to changing circuit design.
2.3.1 Tube configuration method
Through simulations we know, CNTFET needs more than one tube in single tran-
sistor. Because only one tubes would have larger propagation delay,low driving cur-
rent(related simulation are shown at below).In order to improve the performance of
CNTFET, array of CNTs are needed in CNTFET.Large number of array in CNTFET
can make variety structure variety. Changing tube configuration is considered as a
important resolution.The different configuration of CNT can result different charac-
teristic.
Nowadays, there are four configurations. Shared-tube configuration and parallel-
tube configuration already exist in manufacturing field. Transistor-stacking(TrS) and
tube-stacking (TuS) configurations are new structures which have been proposed
recently.
Shared-tube(ST) configuration use one tube to form a multi-channel structure
(four channel are formed in Figure2-5(a)). The configuration has switching source
and drain contacts,so the contact numbers are decreased dramatically. Parallel-tube
transistors are enable to deliver macroscopic currents which is an important devel-
opment for future circuit application[22]. Because all transistors share the same
tube,transistors would related with each other. So if one part of the tube has metallic
characteristic,the whole structure can not be used.
The parallel-tube(PT) configuration use parallel tubes to connect the source and
drain terminal in transistor. Fig2-5(b) shows a four parallel tubes structure.
17
Figure 2-5 Tube configurations (a) ST, (b) PT, (c) TrS, and (d) TuS.(figure
from[23])
These two configurations would have low metallic tube tolerance.Because if only
one metallic tube grow in the transistor,the channel from source to drain terminal
would have a ohmic short. In order to improve this tolerance, new configurations
have been proposed. One is Transistor-stacking(TrS) configuration, another one is
tube-stacking(TuS) configuration. Both of these method can be used to increase
metallic tube tolerance.
Transistor-stacking configuration(TrS) is shown in fig2-5(c). This method use
two tubes to connect the source and drain terminal,instead of using only one tube
to connect them at before. Then all tubes are stacked on a same internode. An-
other method is tube-stacking configuration(TuS),which is shown in fig2-5(d).This
structure is similar to TrS,the only difference is that all tubes are stacked on different
nodes.
However, it has some performance penalties. For example,the channel number
would be reduced in TuS and TrS. In PT configuration,one channel need only one
tube,but in these new configurations,it would need more than one tube. Moreover,the
drive current would be reduced[23]. Misaligned tubes in TrS or TuS is another chal-
lenge. Because it would influence the yield of logic gates[23]. Compare these two
kinds of configuration, metallic tube tolerance of TuS is higher than TrS, this means
the metallic influence on TuS would be small. So it is good to transistor performance.
In TuS,short circuit only happened when tubes on same stack are metallic tube. If
at least one semiconducting tube exist in each stack,the transistor still can works ap-
18
propriately. But this structure would need more precise control. Moreover,compare
with TrS, TuS will have small leakage current. Because no node share with others
nodes[23].
Figure 2-6 TrS configurations,C and D
are metallic tubes[23]
Figure 2-7 TuS configuration,C and E
are metallic tubes[23]
From Figure2-6 we know, in TrS if C and D are metallic tubes, the transistor can
not work correctly. Because the ohmic short between the source and drain. In TuS,
C and D are metallic tubes, this structure still has correct logic function. Because
there is no ohmic short between the two terminals(Figure2-7).
Through the explanation at above, we can find TuS has high metallic tube toler-
ance than TrS.
Area estimation in CNTFET
CNTFET would have more area efficiency than MOSFET in integrate circuit.
First, PMOS/NMOS are generated on a piece of n-well/p-well and the distance from
source to well should be larger than 6?(so the distance from PMOS to NMOS is
larger than 12?). Second,in order to receive the same resistance value in NMOS and
PMOS, PMOS’s width is 2 times wider than NMOS. Because the mobility of holes
is lower than mobility of electrons. But size of PCNTFET and NCNTFET are same.
Moreover,there is no limitation for the tube distance. So CNTFET can reduce the
size of logic circuit.
While compare with the different tube configuration area, we can find that paral-
lel tube configuration would have higher area efficiency than TrS configuration. It is
shown in Fig2-6 and Fig2-7. Because of distance between the nodes is 3?, So TrS
take more space than PT[24]. Some details are show in figures at below.
19
Figure 2-8 Layout of inverters
implemented with Parallel Tube
Figure 2-9 Layout of inverters
implemented with Transistor Stack-
ing(TrS)
2.3.2 ACCNT design method
As mentioned before, researchers focus on eliminating metallic CNTs, such as elec-
trical burning and etching. But all of these methods can not eliminate all metal-
lic tubes, even some of them would destroy the structure of semiconducting tubes.
While ACCNT a new solution is being made[21]. ACCNT is a design method that
uses asymmetrically correlated CNT to create CNTFET logic circuit. This can make
sure the logic gate function correct by changing the structure of logic gate. Moreover,
this design would increase the metallic CNT tolerance without the need of removing
metallic tubes.
Asymmetrically correlated carbon nano-tube design(ACCNT) is a solution which
don’t need to remove and break the metallic tubes from transistor like conventional
method. This design methodology can improve the probability of metallic tubes and
receive high Ion-Ioff ratio.
Figure 2-10 ACCNT design structure
In this project, writer use 2*2,3*3 or more CNTFETs ACCNT design to replace
one P-CNTFET or N-CNTFET. This design method would not change the logic
function of circuit,and it would reduce the influence cause by metallic tubes. In
conventional design,if only one metallic tube exist in transistor,this transistor can not
work correctly. So the whole function of circuit will be influence. In ACCNT struc-
ture,assume the transistor in the first column and first row have metallic tubes,this
transistor can be treat as a resistor. But other transistors in the same column still
work normally. So the whole function is not changed by only one transistor. Only
20
when all transistors in the same column have metallic tubes,the logic function would
be influenced. But the ratio is much smaller than before.
In fabrication,CNTFETs in horizontal are identical.Because their share same
tubes. Thus, if CNTFET1 has 6 tubes and 3 of them are metallic tubes,CNTFET2
and CNTFET3 contain the same number of metallic tubes and semiconducting tubes
(structure are shown in Figure2-11). So they are highly correlated. But actually,this
is an ideal situation,because the length of tubes are not same in manufacture. This
part writer assume no variation exist in the length of CNT, so we can treat the CNT-
FET in same row are identical.
Then,the transistors in vertical are uncorrelated and different.This can make sure
the metallic tubes would not exist in all transistors in same column at the same time.
So we can draw the conclusion that CNTFETs in horizontal are same, CNTFETs in
vertical are different. The placement of tubes are shown in figure at below(the red
one means metallic tube,the blue one means semiconducting tube).
Figure 2-11 ACCNT structure in tubes
Using Psemi to represent the probability of a tube is semiconducting.The proba-
bility of one CNTFET with Ncnt tubes is
Ppertransistor = (Psemi)NCNT [21] (2-7)
So the probability of having correct logic function/metallic tubes tolerance in one
vertical line can be calculated as below:[21]
Poverall = 1 ? (1 ? (Psemi)NCNT )mrows (2-8)
Where Poverall is the probability of metallic tolerance,NCNT is number of tubes in one
transistor, mrows is the number of transistor in one column.
From the equation we can see,increase the number of transistor in each column
would cause high metallic tolerance.Even it can approach 100  when we use more
transistors.
21
On the other hand,put more transistors in serious would lead to reduced Ion. Be-
cause series transistor bring large total resistance which would increase by a factor of
transistor number in one column. The reduced drive current may not satisfy the min-
imum current which can make the circuit works appropriately. In simulation did at
before,we found the increased tube numbers(NCNT ) would bring large drive current.
But from Equation2-8 we can see,it also would degrade metallic CNT tolerance.
In ACCNT design methodology,n columns of series transistors are used to in-
crease the drive current(increased by a factor of column numbers). Moreover,because
the transistor in same row share tubes,the total metallic tube tolerance is same with
the first column metallic tube tolerance. To sum up,ACCNT design not only increase
Poverall,but also keep drive current unchanged.
Actually,ACCNT design can be achieved in other structures,such as Parallel struc-
tures, Series structures,Weave structure[21]. Parallel structure is shown in figure at
below. Further works in this project are base on Parallel rows structure. While in
Series structure,transistors in same row put in parallel,then connect each row in se-
ries. The Weave structure combine the two above methods together. This approach
can share the contacts in adjacent row or column,so the number of contacts reduced.
Moreover the capacitance between contacts and space would reduced in this way.The
three structures have different benefits. Parallel Structure would have less probabil-
ity of ohmic short(only when metallic tubes exist in same column). Series Structure
would have less probability of open circuit. At last,Weave Structure have the mini-
mum size compare with other. Which one is best would depends on the circuit we
need.
22
Figure 2-12 ACCNT structure
Ideally,from the structure we know that CNTFETs in the same row have identi-
cal characteristic(such as threshold voltage,leakage current), CNTFETs in same col-
umn have different characteristic. Because of the identical characteristic in different
columns, the number of columns would not influence the total metallic tubes.
But in reality, the above situation is an ideal one. With the increase of series
CNTFETs number,the length variation would bring influence to ACCNT structure.
Because CNTFETs in same row share the same tubes, more transistors would need
long CNT. But sometimes CNT would ended midway,so the number of tubes in same
row would be different. This would cause the characteristic difference in same row.
However,it can be improved with the scaling down of transistor. When the chan-
nel length is scaling,the tube situation in same row would be same. Because the
probability of tube ended midway would decrease. All in all,this is still a potential
design method is the near future. The circuit design does not need extra processes,so
it is easy to implement. And it do not need to remove the metallic tubes in CNT-
FET. This ACCNT structure can be used to have high output resistance in analog
circuit,and can be used in current mirror as a matched device(Albert Lin,2009).
Incorrect connection of ACCNT structure
As we said at before,the correct connection way is that CNTFETs in same row
23
are same and CNTFETs in same column are different. One error connection would
be connect the transistor which share same tubes in series(connect the row in series
at here). In this situation,the semiconducting probability would not be improved.
Because transistors in series are same,so the total probability would equal to one
transistor probability.[21]
Poverall = P(atleastonesemitube) = P(allsemitube) = (Psemi)NCNT (2-9)
From equation2-9 we know,it is same with conventional single transistor. In order to
have improved metallic tube tolerance,transistor in same column should be different.
Another error connection is that transistor in same row are not share the same
tubes. So transistor would be different and would have different number of semicon-
ducting and metallic tubes. The total probability of semiconducting would not only
depends on just one column. All columns in the structure would have influence on
it,because each row have different probability. The equation can be shown as below:
Poverall = (1 ? (1 ? (Psemi)NCNT )mrows)ncolumn (2-10)
We know the probability would be much smaller than before. Because each col-
umn should have one semiconducting tube at least. In this error connection way,
getting 99 percent Poverall with equal row and column number,at least 59*59 struc-
ture is needed. While in a the correct ways,only 41*41 structure is enough(Albert
Lin,2009)[21]. So the correct connection method is more area efficiency.
When error connection happens in rows and columns at same time,this would
be the worst situation(even worse than the single transistor). The semiconducting
probability is:
Poverall = ((Psemi)NCNT )ncolumn (2-11)
24
3 Methodology
3.1 Models been used in project
3.1.1 CNTFET model
In this project, CNTFETs choose to use 32nm Stanford Model.The Stanford univer-
sity CNTFET model is a compact, CMOS-like, enhancement-model. Moreover,this
model consider some non-ideal situation. For example, extension region effect in
source and drain,inter-CNT charge screening effect(from Stanford university nano-
electronics group).
Some limitations exist in Stanford model:the minimum tube number is one.The
channel length can not be less than 10nm. If the sub-10nm region is defined in this
model, errors would happen. But there is no limitation in the maximum channel
length. If the length is larger than 100nm,it would be treat as long-channel transistor.
channel length less than 100nm would treat as short-channel device automatically.
Moreover,the minimum channel width is 4nm. At last, some kind of parasitics ca-
pacitance and resistance are considered,such as source-drain capacitance and gate
resistance. Schottky barrier also can be observed in this model. But things need to
be taken carefully is that the doping concentration in source/drain extension region
should above the first conduction band. Otherwise, error result may be received(from
Quick user Guide,2009).
There are two types of model: Stanford CNTFET Model; Uniform-tubes CNT-
FET Model. The Stanford CNTFET Model consider charge screening effect. Be-
cause the tubes place at the margin in different from the tubes place in the mid-
dle. In this model,The CNTs at the margin have small charge screening effect.
Thus,Comparing with Uniform-tubes CNTFET Model,Stanford CNTFET model is
more accurate.
The Uniform-tubes CNTFET Model don’t consider charge screening effect. Be-
cause it uniform the tubes in transistor.This model have faster speed than the former
one.But it would be less accurate than Standard Model.
In order to improve the times of running,the code at below should be included at
the beginning of Hspice CNTFET model code.
Then calling relevant model files in code is important. ’CNFET.lib’ file contains
the CNTFET model which need to be used in this project. ’.lib’ command( ".lib ’CN-
FET.lib’ CNFET" ) means calling the model file. So all models in ’CNTFET.lib’ can
be imported. The syntax of CNTFET model is similar to CMOS model. CNTFET
model also has four terminals: source drain,gate,substrate. Moreover the port of
source and drain can not be changed. The sub terminal can be used as a back gate in
25
some circuit.But the original gate terminal still need to be used as gate(like gate in
MOSFET), because some parameter use an estimated value in substrate terminal.
In Stanford model,if not definition for parameter values, it means using the de-
fault value,and all default value in this model can be found in [25].
3.1.2 MOSFET model
In order to compare CNTFET with MOSFET roundly,the 45nm BSIM4(Berkeley
Short-Channel IGFET Model ) MOSFET model and 45nm PTM(Predictive Tech-
nology Model) model have been used.
BSIM4 has been develop based on BSIM3. Because of current technology re-
quirement,transistors need to be smaller than before. But reducing transistor size
would bring challenges to transistor,such as non-uniform substrate doping concen-
tration and probabilities to RF application[26]. While this model already solve the
problems when transistor scaling into 100nm realm. Moreover,BSIM4 has more ad-
vantages than BSIM3[26]:
• In high-frequency and high-speed analog/digital circuit,it has accurate intrinsic
input resistance.
• A accurate channel thermal noise model.
• A accurate gate direct tunneling effect.
• It is a gate-induced leakage(drain-source) model(first time in BSIM model).
PTM(Predictive Technology Model) is a precise, predictive and customizable
model in future microelectronic technology. This model can be used to predict the
characteristic of transistor which would appear in next few years. PTM also has
its benefits when channel length go into sub-10nm region. The benefits are list at
below(from Predictive Technology Model Website)[?]:
• Using a novel way to predict the characteristic which is more physical and
scalable.
• Reliability problem and emerging variability already been solved in this model.
• It is a predication of different kinds of transistor.For example,FinFET,Bulk.
3.2 Method on comparing MOSFET and CNTFET on different
parts
As we know,the Stanford CNTFET is similar to conventional MOSFET. So methods
to design the logic circuit are similar. Writer set the supply voltage to 0.7V which
can make sure all models(Stanford CNTFET,BSIM4 MOSFET and PTM MOSFET)
work appropriately. And other environment variations(temperature,load capacitance)
should set to the same value. This will let they work in same(equivalent) situation.
While in MOSFET Wp/Wn=2 use to make same resistance value in pull-up and pull-
down network.In CNTFET, PCNTFET/NCNTFET=1, because P/N CNTFET have
26
same driving current ability. The equivalent parameter in CNTFET is tube numbers.
The width of CNTFET increase means the number of tubes increase. In CNTFET
library writer set tube=3 as a default value.
The following items demonstrate the method in each part:
• VTC analysis: writer sweep the supply voltage from 0.1V to 0.8V in differ-
ent channel length MOSFET models. In all of this circuits, 10f capacitance is
loaded at the end.Because in practical circuit,loading capacitance would exist,
this can let the simulation circuit more close to practical circuit.Finally, com-
pare the transition region of different model,such as the threshold voltage and
switching speed from the output waveform.
• Temperature influence analysis: simulations work on different temperature.
Then using ’.meas’ to calculate the average power,delay,Ids in different situa-
tion.The calculate result are saved in ’.mt’ file when it is a transient analysis.
When the circuit has a dc analysis,The result will be saved in’.sw’ file. Using
matlab to generate line chart from the data in Hspice,so we can see the trend
easily.
• Static properties analysis: changing the input patterns for NAND gate,then do
transient,dc analysis separately.At last,the waveform can show the difference
caused by input pattern clearly.
• Ion,Ioff analysis: simulations are based on ACCNT structure transistor, AC-
CNT structure and tube numbers impact on Ion/Ioff ratio. In this part,we use
ACCNT structure from 1*1 to 4*4 and tube numbers from 1 to 4 as an ex-
ample. As we know,Stanford MOSFET model don’t have key word to cal-
culate the Ids in certain transistor.So writer use the current through supply
voltage(I(vdd)) to replace it. Ion and Ioff are calculated from Vdd.These two
values depend on the in put value. For example,in P-CNTFET ACCNT struc-
ture,Ion can be calculated in VDD when all inputs are 0; Ioff can be calculated
in VDD when all inputs are 1. In N-CNTFET ACCNT structure,the input val-
ues are reverse. At last,make a table to show the trend of Ion/Ioff when the
structure and tube number changes.
• Library comparison: the delay calculated in library is not the longest delay
in every logic gate. In MOSFET,we can use capacitance and input pattern
to find the longest delay.While in CNTFET,due to the different structure,the
capacitance influence will be different.So the way to find the longest delay in
MOSFET is not useful in CNTFET. In order to compare the same logic gate
in different model fairly,delay in same logic gate is the same path delay. The
power consumption in here is the mean value in the whole transient analysis.
The leakage current is only the subthreshold leakage current which is the main
part of total leakage current. In MOSFET, leakage is measured by key word
’lx4(transistor name)’ which is the Ids of certain transistor. But in CNTFET,the
only method to calculated is using I(vdd). From this we can see the value
in MOSFET is more precise than the counterpart of CNTFET. Because some
logic gate(such as flip-flop,mux0n,mux1n,min and so on) is build by some sub-
circuits, and more than one path will be connected with Vdd node. In some
27
logic gate,there is not input pattern can let all pull-up networks turn off at same
time. So it may contains a small part of Ion current in some sub-circuit’s pull-
up path. All in all the practical value in CNTFETs should be smaller than the
calculated value from Hspice simulation in CNTFET model.
3.3 Method on ACCNT analysis
In ACCNT analysis,writer create 1*1,2*2,3*3,4*4,5*5 as sub-circuit separately, each
logic will call these sub-circuit.All CNTFETs in this part have 3 semiconducting
tubes in each transistor.
The way to analysis the metallic tubes in ACCNT structure is an equivalent
method to replace the existence of metallic tubes. High input voltage for N-CNTFET
or low input voltage for P-CNTFET are given to the transistor which has metallic
tubes. Using this way is that Stanford model do not consider the situation of metal-
lic tubes. And from the characteristic of metallic tubes(ohmic short when metal
tube exist in transistor),writer found using input gate voltage to turn on the transistor
instead of ohmic short caused by metal is an equivalent way. In ACCNT struc-
ture,transistor in same row are same,so if CNTFET in first row and first column has
metallic tubes,all transistor in first row will have metallic tubes. It looks like the
CNTFETs in first row are turn on. So change the input to let this row of transistor
turn on is a convenient method to replace the metallic percentage in ACCNT struc-
ture. Different percentage of metallic tubes are controlled by the number of tubes
which are turn on.
Full adder in different ACCNT structure is easy to be realized by using ACCNT
structure models. ACCNT full adder needs to use ACCNT model to replace the
single CNTFET used in conventional design.No other parameters need to be changed
in this design.
More details of methodology for building the whole library and ACCNT de-
sign/analysis will be explained in each section separately.
28
4 Result
4.1 Simulation results and assessment on Carbon Nano-tube Field-
Effect Transistors (CNTFETs)
The operation principle of CNTFET is similar to traditional CMOS. The output char-
acteristic for P-CNTFET and N-CNTFET are shown in Figure4-1 and Figure4-2.
Figure 4-1 Output characteristic of N-type CNTFET as a function of Vgs
Figure 4-2 Output characteristic of P-type CNTFET as a function of Vgs
In MOSFET,if it is N-MOSFET,the substrate of transistor is P-type,the source
and drain terminal is N-type. When the gate voltage increased, holes would driven
away from the gates. Then the inversion layer was forming. The n-channel exists
between source and drain. When the voltage Vds is large than zero,the current is
conducted. The larger the Vgs,the higher the density of electron in inversion layer.
So the current between source and drain would increase. If the Vgs is below than
threshold voltage,only a small leakage current would exist in the channel.
If it is P-MOSFET, the substrate of transistor is N-type,the source and drain ter-
minal is P-type. When Vgs is negative,the p-channel was forming. If Vgs is much
smaller than zero,it will leads to much higher electron density than before. So the
current in saturation region is higher than small Vgs. If Vgs is less negative than
threshold voltage,the p-channel would disappear.
29
From the output characteristic of CNTFETs we know, its characterization is sim-
ilar to MOSFETs. Moreover, in some performance it is superior to CMOS, such as
excellent current capabilities, low power delay product, lower average leakage power
which would be verified at below. Compare CNTFET with MOSFET, the width ra-
tio of PMOS/NMOS is 2-3 in MOSFET (in this project, PMOS/NMOS=2 has been
used), because holes move more slowly than electrons,the PMOS has to be wider
to deliver the same current as NMOS. In CNTFET, PCNFET/NCNFET ratio is 1,
because NCNFET and PCNFET have same current driving capabilities. Moreover,
CNTFET devices are 6x faster than NMOS and 13x faster than PMOS[27]. CNT-
FET displays a big improvement in time delay which because of the high gain in
CNTFET. And its improved performance still preserved in low supply voltage.
4.1.1 Voltage transfer characteristic for CNTFET and MOSFET
In MOSFET,when the channel length is less than 65nm,many side effects appear.
In this section,different channel length MOSFETs models(Low-power model) are
compared with 32nm Stanford CNTFET model.
Figure 4-3 Voltage transfer characteristic for 32nm CNTFET and 45nm MOSFET
Figure 4-4 Voltage transfer characteristic for 32nm CNTFET and 32nm MOSFET
30
Figure 4-5 Voltage transfer characteristic for 32nm CNTFET and 22nm MOSFET
Figure 4-6 Voltage transfer characteristic for 32nm CNTFET and 16nm MOSFET
The X-axis is Vin,Y-axis is Vout.The curves in four figures are the voltage trans-
fer characteristic at different supply voltage(from 0.1V -0.8V). From simulations we
know that CNTFET performs a better characteristic than MOSFET in different chan-
nel length model. Even when the channel length of MOSFET is 45nm, CNTFETs
still have better performance in different supply voltage. The curves in four fig-
ures are symmetric. And the inverter logic gates would switch on when Vin=Vdd/2.
Moreover, CNTFETs still have a steep curve when the supply voltage is quite small.
Compare with the MOSFET of different channel length, the long channel length
would has better voltage transfer characteristic. And small size transistor will influ-
enced by short channel effect.
4.1.2 Temperature influence
The environment temperature would affect the transistor in two different aspects:
(1)threshold voltage reduced with the rising of temperature.So in same Vgs,the re-
ceived Ids will larger than before.(2)As the increase of temperature,the majority car-
rier mobility in channel is degraded. Then the transfer characteristic slope mini-
mized,this will cause low transconductance.
31
In this part,the circuit simulation temperature sweeps from 0 to 125 degree,then
compare 32nm MOSFET with 32nm CNTFET at the delay, power consumption and
leakage current.All the simulations are based on inverter logic gate.
Figure 4-7 Delay characteristic at different temperature
From figur4-7 we can see that the propagation delay of MOSFET and CNT-
FET inverters are decreased with the rising of temperature. In MOSFET,the delay
is 1.579e-10s at zero degree,and it reduce to 1.365e-10s at 125 degree which is still
larger than CNTFET in any circuit simulation temperature. In CNTFET, the delay of
inverter almost keep constant(about 1.365e-10s). So CNTFET has a better stability
in propagation delay.
Figure 4-8 Power characteristic at different temperature
With the increase of temperature, the average power consumption for MOSFET
increase from 4.106e-07W to 5.775e-07W, because of the increase of leakage cur-
rent. While CNTFET’s leakage keep stable about 2.77e-07W which is good to char-
acterization of CNTFET. So in Figure4-8 we can see that the leakage current in
CNTFET is less related with environment temperature.
32
Figure 4-9 Power characteristic at different temperature
In leakage current,CNTFET still performs better characterization than MOS-
FET,although both of them would increased by high temperature which can be shown
in Figure4-9. The leakage current is consist of three parts:subthreshold leakage cur-
rent, gate-oxide leakage current, band-to-band tunneling leakage current. The sub-
threshold leakage is the significant part which takes a large percentage. So in Hspice,
we test this part of leakage to replace the total leakage. Subthreshold leakage means
the current from drain to source when the transistor turn off or the gate voltage less
than threshold voltage. In Berkeley Short-Channel IGFET model(BSIM),it is mainly
determined by the structure of transistor and working temperature.
Isub = I0e(Vgs?Vt)/(nVT ) (4-1)
I0 = u0Cox(W/L)V2T e
1.8 (4-2)
Cox-gate-oxide thickness,W-channel width,L-channel length,VT -thermal voltage,Vt-
threshold voltage,n-Threshold amplitude coefficient
4.1.3 Static properties of complementary CMOS and CNT gate
In this part,different input patterns are given to observe delay and voltage transfer
characteristic. From Figure4-10 we can see that the switching speed is different in
different input patterns. And the table at below shows the delay time in details.
33
Figure 4-10 Transient analysis of different input patterns
Figure 4-11 NAND GATE
Because of charging and discharging capacitance in transistor, the delay de-
pends on input patterns. This part focus on characterization of different input pat-
terns. 32nm PTM-model(Predictive Technology Model) and 32nm Stanford CNT-
FET model have been used to compare the delay. In MOSFET,width of PMOS/width
of NMOS=2. In CNTFET,the number of semiconducting tubes is 3. In order to
compare the two kinds of transistor in same surrounding,the supply voltage,load ca-
pacitance,temperature,and other environment variable are same.
Figure4-10 shows low-to-high delay for different input patterns,CNTFET is much
faster than MOSFET in different input patterns. Only when input is B=1,A=1->0,the
delay for CNTFET and MOSFET are same. In other input patterns,the delay in CNT-
FET improved about 60 -90  than MOSFET. As expected,when two inputs go low
at same time,it result in a smallest delay. The worst case in MOSFET depends on
which input goes low first. Because different potential in internal node cause the
charging and discharging in capacitance. For example, when B=1 and A switch
from 1 to 0,the PUN(pull-up network) only need to charge the output node capac-
itance,because transistor A(NMOS) is turn off. But when A=1 and B switch form
1 to 0,it would need extra time to charge the internal node capacitance and output
node capacitance, because transistor A(NMOS) is turn on. So this situation in MOS-
FET would have larger delay than former one. The simulation result can be show in
34
table.In MOSFET,when A=1 and B=1->0,it has 5.991e-10s delay which is slightly
larger than 5.948e-10(A=1->0,B=1).
In CNTFET,the delay in different input patterns are smaller than counterpart of
MOSFET as we expect. The precise values are shown in table at above. So we can
get the result that CNTFET performs better delay characterization than MOSFET in
same environment variable.
Figure 4-12 VTC of CMOS and CNT nand gate with different input patterns
Figure4-12 shows the voltage transfer characteristic in CNTFET and MOSFET.
In this part,writer analysis the pull-down network as an example.As we know,there
are three situations which can cause the output goes low.(1)A and B change from
0 to 1 at the same time,(2)A keep constant at 1,B changes from 0 to 1,(3)B keep
constant at 1,A changes from 0 to 1. From simulation we know VTC performs a
slightly difference when input patterns are different.
In MOSFET,case(1) inputs switch at same time. In the initial value,both P-
MOSFETs are turn on,so it would have a strong pull up network which would cause
the curve shift right than others. In case(2) and case(3) the pull up networks are
weaker than case(1),the curves move left than the former one(show it in figure4-
12).As we know the threshold voltage would influence on the internal node volt-
age(Vnode)
VthnA = Vth0 + r((
√
|2? f | + Vnode) ?
√
|2? f |)[28] (4-3)
VthnB = Vth0 (4-4)
From the two equations we know, in case(2),the A-NMOS is turn on,so the pull down
network depends on B-NMOS.The threshold voltage of B is equal to Vth0 which is
less than Vth of A. So the distance of moving left is more than case(3).In case(3),the
B-NMOS is turn on,so Vnode is bigger than zero.From equation4-3 we know that this
situation needs high threshold voltage to let the output pull down(the curve in the
middle).
In VTC simulation, CNTFET has similar trend but it performs better than MOS-
FET. The VTC curves of CNTFET are steeper than MOSFET and switch in the
middle of the supply voltage(around 0.35V).
35
4.1.4 Ion Ioff of CNTFET
Because of the unique structure of CNTFET, the features would be influenced by
the unique parameter such as the number of tubes in transistor and the probability
of metallic tubes. This part writer will focus on the Ion-Ioff ratio in different tube
numbers and ACCNT structure(explained in next chapter).
In Hspice, we assume all tubes in transistor are semiconducting tubes. The Ion
current of semiconducting tubes is IONs. The Ioff current of semiconducting tubes is
IOFFs. The equations are shown at below(describe in[29])
IONs =
gCNT (VDD ? Vth)
1 + gCNT Ls?s
(4-5)
IOFFs =
IONuµ
r
(10?Vth/S ) (4-6)
gCNT - transconductance of CNTFET;?s - resistance per source region length;Ls -
CNT length;IONu is the mean value of IONs;r - the maximum value of Ion/Ioff.
From Equation(4-5),(4-6), the number of tubes increase would cause the de-
crease of ?s which because of the arrange of tubes. So the ON-current would in-
crease,followed by the increase of Ioff. In Hspice simulation,through sweep the
number of tubes,we can find the larger tube numbers cause large Ion and Ioff current.
The simulation result obeys the result get from the equations.
Figure 4-13 Ion Ioff for CNTFET at different accnt structure
In ACCNT structure(described in next chapter),the complicated ACCNT struc-
ture cause Ion decrease slightly in P-CNTFET and N-CNTFET. But it is worthwhile
to note that the Ioff(leakage) almost keep stable in these two kinds(P-CNTFET and
N-CNTFET) of transistor when the structure becomes complicated.The stable leak-
age current is good for the performance of transistor.
The parameter to evaluate a better characterization of transistor is Ion/Ioff ratio.
Table3 is the Ion-Ioff ratio of P/N-CNTFET. As the number of tubes increase,the
ratio would increase,which means the Ion is much bigger than Ioff(even can be ne-
glect). Even large number would cause a slightly increase on Ioff, the speed of
36
Ion increase is higher than the speed of Ioff increase.So Ion/Ioff would larger than
before(conventional CNTFET structure). But the drawback is that the ratio would
decrease when the more transistors are used(such as 4*4 structure). Although the
disadvantage exists in this structure,this structure still has a potential future in next
microelectronic development. Because this structure has the advantage of reducing
the probability of metallic tubes(high metallic tube tolerance).
Table4-2 Ion/Ioff ratio for N-CNTFET and P-CNTFET
4.2 Delay,power,leakage of MOSFET and CNTFET
Because of the demand for complicated and fast computation,more and more high
density circuits were used. Using traditional MOSFET to reduce the delay, power,
leakage was much harder than before.So CNTFET act as a perfect substitute in mi-
croelectronic field.In this project the main objective is building the whole library in
CNTFET and comparing the CNTFET characteristic with MOSFET.
4.2.1 Calculation of delay,power consumption,leakage current
propagation delay of MOSFET is determined by the parasitic delay and effort
delay which was shown in equation at below:
D = f + p (4-7)
Where f is effort delay or stage effort which depends on the complexity and fan-out
of the gate; p is parasitic delay inherent to the gate when no load is attached.From
these we know, when load capacitance increased, propagation delay would increase.
While in CNTFET, because of the different structure, the factor which would
influence the delay would be slightly different. For example,limited control over
the growth of CNT would generate misaligned CNTs, which can lead to incorrect
logic function in circuit[30]. Moreover, there are two types of tubes in CNTFET, one
is metallic tube; another one is semiconducting tube. Because of the existence of
metallic tubes, the ohmic short between source and drain would result in large current
in the OFF network. Moreover, reduced static noise margin will be generated, and
delay will be influenced.
37
In complementary circuit, the pull-up network has pull-up delay,the pull-down
network has pull-down delay.
DPU = K
1
ION_PU ? IOFF_PD (4-8)
where ION_PU is the total on current of pull-up network,IOFF_PD is the total off current
of pull-down network.DPU is the delay of pull up network.
DPD = K
1
ION_PD ? IOFF_PU (4-9)
where ION_PD is the total on current of pull-down network,IOFF_PU is the total off
current of pull-up network.DPD is the delay of pull down network. The delay of
complementary circuit is the biggest one(equation cited from[31]).
Dg = max(DPU ,DPD) (4-10)
So from the above description,the delay of logic gate would influenced by Ion and
Ioff of the PDN and PUN.
Power consumption was a secondary consideration behind speed and area in mi-
croelectronic technology. It is another important part to measure the transistor per-
formance. As the transistor number and frequency increased,power consumption
would increase dramatically.
In CMOS,the total power consumption can be divided into four parts:PD,PS C,PS
and PG[32].
PT = PD + PS C + PS + PG (4-11)
PD - dynamic power;PS C - short-circuit power;PS - static power;PG - gate leakage
power. PD is caused by subthreshold conduction through OFF transistor,tunneling
current, contention current in rationed circuit.While PS was mainly due to charging
and discharging of load capacitance[33].
PD = ?(C ? f ? VDD2) (4-12)
PS C ≈ (0.15 ? PD) (4-13)
PS = Io f f ? VDD (4-14)
PG = Ig ? VDD (4-15)
where C is the load capacitance;? is activity factor; f is clock frequency;Ig is the gate
leakage.The ways of power calculation still can be used in CNTFET logic circuit.In
this project, average power consumption was calculated in both models.
Leakage Current The leakage current of CNTFET would depends on the tube
diameter and supply voltage.Beacuse these two parameter would influence the band
gap of carbon nano-tubes and band-to-band tunneling.
38
4.2.2 Load capacitance influence on BSIM4 MOSFET model and Stanford
CNTFET model
In MOSFET,the load capacitance would bring a significant influence in propaga-
tion delay,power consumption and leakage current.While in CNTFET,no full-scale
research did on the influence of load capacitance and building the whole library sys-
tematically.So one of main objectives is building the CNTFET library and analysis
the characterization of it.
In this part,writer use BSIM4 MOSFET model to compare with Stanford CNT-
FET model.
Delay of BSIM4 MOSFET model and Stanford CNTFET model library with
different load
In MOSFET,the load capacitance would influence the propagation delay which
writer already mentioned at before.The two figures are show the propagation delay
when the load capacitance is 10f and when no load capacitance.The measured delay
in this part is not the longest delay in each logic gate. But the delay in same logic
function,same path delay have been measured.
Figure 4-14 Delay for BSIM4 MOSFET and CNTFET-0f
Without load capacitance,the delay of the whole library logic gates are relatively
small. MOSFET almost keep around 109, while CNTFET only about 1012 1011(data
result from Hspice simulation)which is about 100-1000 times smaller than MOSFET.
39
Figure 4-15 Delay for BSIM4 MOSFET and CNTFET-10f
When the load capacitance increased,the delay for both models are increase.But
CNTFETs are still much faster than MOSFET which can be show in Figure4-15. In
’and gate’,’or gate’, the improvement are significant.
Power of BSIM4 MOSFET model and Stanford CNTFET model library with
different load
In this part,writer calculate the average power consumption in the two models.In
order to compare it in same situation,using the same supply voltage, input pulse, tem-
perature and other environment parameters to make sure it can be compared fairly.
As we know,the input patterns would influence the power consumption,because the
different Ion and leakage current would cause different power conusmption. So in
same logic gate,the input pulses are same.
Figure 4-16 Power for BSIM4 MOSFET and CNTFET-0f
40
Through analysis we can see that the average CNTFET power consumption al-
most 100 times smaller than MOSFET in the whole library. Even when the circuit
load 10f capacitance at the end, both of their power consumption would increase, but
the improvement in CNTFET library still exist(show it in Figure4-17).
Figure 4-17 Power for BSIM4 MOSFET and CNTFET-10f
Further simulations also show the low power characterization,such as loading
100f capacitance.The significant benefit it has can be used in lots of microelectronic
fields which need low power dissipation.
Leakage of MOSFET model and CNTFET model library
This project we only consider the main leakage current–subthreshold leakage.In
BSIM4, using the key word ’lx4(transistor name)’ to get the value of Ids.So we can
calculate all the transistor which is off to get the total leakage current. But in Stanford
CNTFET,no key words have been given to calculate the Ids. So using Ivdd(current
through supply voltage) to replace Ids. The experiment data of leakage current it
CNTFET would be larger than practical value.Because other currents are calculate
in it.For example,in flip-flop,this kind of logic circuit is consisted of sub-circuits.In
this circuit,no input pattern existed to let all transistors in pull-up network turn off.
41
Figure 4-18 Leakage for MOSFET and CNTFET
The result shows CNTFETs have a small leakage current.Actually,the leakage
characterization for CNTFET would be better than the figure shows.
After simulation in Stanford CNTFET library and BSIM4 library,we found that
Stanford CNTFET has better characteristic in delay,power consumption,leakage cur-
rent.When the load capacitance exist,these advantages still exist.
4.2.3 Load capacitance influence on PTM MOSFET model and Stanford CNT-
FET model
PTM MOSFET model is a predictive model. In this part we use 45nm channel
length PTM model. This model is an improved one which has less delay,power
consumption,leakage current than 45nm BSIM4 model we used at before.
Delay of VTL MOSFET model and Stanford CNTFET model library with dif-
ferent load
From figure4-19 we know,CNTFET library which without load capacitance still
has less delay than PTM model,although PTM is an improved model in these param-
eters.
42
Figure 4-19 Delay for PTM MOSFET and Stanford CNTFET-0f
Figure 4-20 Delay for PTM MOSFET and Stanford CNTFET-10f
As the load capacitance increase to 10f in each logic gate. The delay for both
two models are increased. But CNTFET model always perform slightly better char-
acteristic in propagation delay than PTM MOSFET model. Compare Figure4-20
with Figure4-15,the delay for PTM low power model improves a lot than BSIM4
model.Although it is a improved model, its delay characteristic still inferior to CNT-
FET model.
43
Figure 4-21 Power for PTM MOSFET and Stanford CNTFET-0f
Figure 4-22 Power for PTM MOSFET and Stanford CNTFET-10f
power of VTL MOSFET model and Stanford CNTFET model library with dif-
ferent load
In power consumption part,load capacitance also influence the power consump-
tion in CNTFETs and MOSFETs. Logic gates without capacitance would has rela-
tively low power. All CNTFETs logic gates in this situation would have almost 10
times power consumption improvement than PTM MOSFET models. In 10f capac-
itance,both models’ power increased.But CNTFET’s power consumption is slightly
less than 45nm PTM MOSFET. Only in OAI22 logic gate,CNTFET’s power con-
sumption is larger than MOSFET. But the difference in this logic gate is not obvious.
This small degradation can be neglected when we compare it with the benefits it has.
44
Figure 4-23 Leakage for PTM MOSFET and Stanford CNTFET
leakage of VTL MOSFET model and Stanford CNTFET model library with
different load
Compare CNTFET model with predictive MOSFET model in leakage current as-
pect, the simulation result shows that CNTFET still performs better than this new
improved MOSFET.CNTFET logic gates in library have slightly smaller leakage
current than the counterpart in MOSFET. Only in OAI22 and AOI31 logic gate CNT-
FET have a slightly more leakage current.
So,after comparing the two models,writer get the conclusion that CNTFETs per-
formance is still better than the improved PTM MOSFET models.To sum up,Stanford
CNTFET model has a excellent advantages in delay,power and leakage.It is a poten-
tial model,because it is even better than the predictive model(PTM).
4.2.4 CNTFET library with different number of tubes
The tubes in CNTFET can be divided into two parts, semiconducting tubes and
metallic tubes. If metallic tubes exist in CNTFET,the gate terminal has no control and
has a serious impact on static current,delay,power. Because the ohmic short between
source and drain, new technologies are use to reduce the number of metallic tubes in
manufacturing industry,such as Plasma CVD method,General CVD method[34].In
this part,we assumed all metallic tubes have been removed. The number of tubes
means semiconducting tube numbers.
In general,if the number of tubes is increased, the delay of logic gates are de-
creased. In figure4-24,when the tubes increase from 1 to 4,the delay for all logic
gates would decrease steadily. So large tube numbers would bring a great improve-
ment in delay which is good to switching speed.
45
Figure 4-24 Delay for CNTFET,at different number of tubes
While with the growth of tube numbers,power consumption would increased at
the same time. So the influence on power dissipation is another important thing we
should consider. Like what writer did in last section,give the same input pulse to
same logic gate which has different tube number,then calculate the mean value of
power consumption.
Figure 4-25 Power for CNTFET,at different number of tubes
Figure4-25 shows the increase of tube numbers would not have dramatic influ-
ence on power consumption. In some logic gate, it almost keep constant in different
tube numbers. Delay and power consumption are two opposite factors. In CNTFET,
more tubes will cause less delay but slightly more power consumption. But in the
two figures at above,we can find that the increased tube numbers would bring more
benefits than its drawbacks.
46
Figure 4-26 Leakage current for CNTFET,at different number of tubes
Another thing need to consider is the leakage current after changing the tube
numbers. The leakage current is proportional to the tube numbers.Because more
tubes would transfer more Ioff. High leakage current would cause characteristic
degradation. The results are shown in Figure4-26.
So choosing the tube numbers in CNTFET we should consider and balance many
factors,like delay,power consumption and leakage current we mentioned at before.
Another important thing we need to consider is that the area and probability of metal-
lic tubes in large number tubes CNTFET. Now,some problems can be solved through
new ways of design which i will mention later.
4.2.5 Conclusion of CNTFET library characterization
This part sum up the delay and power consumption value of CNTFET library at
different situation and show the percentage of changes in CNTFET compare with
the counterpart of BSIM4 MOSFET.
47
Table4-3 Delay of CMOS and CNT library
Table4-4 Power of CMOS and CNT library
48
To summarize,tube numbers bring a large improvement on propagation delay.
In table.4-3 we can see that CNTFET delay in some logic gate (such as inverter,
AOI21, OAI21, MUX0N) is still larger than MOSFET’s counterpart when tube=1.
But this can be solved easily when we just add one more tube on transistor. As we
can see,propagation delay has significant improvement when tube=2 and all CNT-
FET logic gates are faster than MOSFET logic circuit. At the same time,the power
consumption in this situation(tube=2) is almost same with tube=1 situation. And in
table4-4 we can see that only a tiny increase in power consumption when the tube
number increase. So tube numbers would not bring too much affects on power con-
sumption,while it would bring a dramatic influence on propagation delay.
After data analysis, CNTFET based logic circuit should have at least two (semi-
conducting)tubes,this can make sure it has superior features than MOSFET.
49
5 Simulation based on asymmetrically correlated CNT
(ACCNT)
5.1 ACCNT design analysis
In this section,researches are based on Parallel structure of ACCNT. Due to the new
design structure would bring more transistor in logic gate and more capacitance be-
tween the contacts, the propagation delay,power consumption and leakage current
will be changed. The propagation delay is determined by the electrons storing speed
on gate capacitance of transistor. So small delay would need high energy/power
consumption to store the energy in small time. The performance in CNTFETs char-
acterization have been shown in different structure.
Figure 5-1 delay for accnt design,at different structure
The delay features at different ACCNT structure are shown in Figure5-1. Using
the basic logic gates(inverter,NAND,NOR) as an example to see the trend of delay.
As the structure becomes complicated, the delay would not increase too much by
the structure. So this phenomenon is good to the transistor which need high speed
and high metallic tube tolerance. In the introduction,we explain that the delay of
CNTFET logic gate is depend on the difference of Ion and Ioff. While the Ion and
Ioff also depends on the series and parallel MOSFET and capacitance in logic gate.
So the structure would bring little influence on propagation delay definitely.
50
Figure 5-2 Power for accnt design,at different structure
While power consumption depends on the supply voltage,input pulse,load capac-
itance and off current of the logic gate. Because the power supply,input pulse and
load capacitance are same. The factor which influence the power consumption is Ioff
in different structure. Through analysis we know that the power consumption almost
makes no change in same logic gate.
Figure 5-3 Leakage for accnt design,at different structure
But Figure5-3 demonstrate that high leakage would caused by large ACCNT
structure. Because more columns would cause high leakage when the transistor turn
off. It can be fixed by reducing the number of columns(like using three transistors
in series and two columns of transistor). But things need to be considered is that we
need to make sure the current drive is larger than the minimum current which can let
the transistor works normally.
51
Figure 5-4 VTC at different structure
Figure5-4 shows voltage transfer characteristic in different ACCNT structure. In
complicated structure,ACCNT still has steep curve in transition region which almost
same with the conventional logic gate design(the curves in same supply voltage al-
most overlap). The curves still symmetric and the logic gate would switch when
input reach Vdd/2. So the ACCNT would not influence voltage transfer characteris-
tic in CNTFETs.
5.2 Metallic tubes influence on leakage in ACCNT structure
This part use 5*5 inverter to analyse the influence of metallic tubes. As we mentioned
before,ACCNT structure has a benefit of increased metallic tube tolerance. This part
focuses on analysis the influence of metallic tubes on ACCNT structure.
Figure 5-5 5*5 Inverter
As we know, transistors in same row share same tubes. So if CNTFET in first row
and first column have one metallic tube,the other 4 CNTFETs in first row have one
metallic tube. 32nm Stanford model are used in this project.In this model,all tubes
are treat as semiconducting tubes and the parameters which can decide the chirality
of tubes are neglected. The approach writer used to measure the influence of metallic
tubes in Hspice is that giving the P-CNTFET low input voltage and N-CNTFET high
voltage when metallic tube exist. Because of metallic tubes characterization, metallic
52
tubes will cause the ohmic short of transistor, the current from drain to source would
are not controlled by Vgs. So it can be treat as a resistor.
Five cases have been done in 5*5 ACCNT inverter structure.(1)without metallic
tubes; (2)10  metallic tubes;(3)20  metallic tubes;(4)30  metallic tubes;(5)40 
metallic tubes. In case(1), giving high input voltage to let the pull up network
close(all P-CNTFET turn off),then calculating the current through Vdd(which almost
equal to subthreshold leakage) in Hspice. In case(2),giving one row of P-CNTFET
low input(0V),and giving high input voltage to let the rest of P-CNTFETs turn off,
then measuring the leakage current. In case(3),giving two rows of P-CNTFET low
input(0V), and following the steps in case(2). Case(4) and case(5) are similar to
case(3), only the P-CNTFET row numbers which have low input voltage are differ-
ent. Things need to mention is that,if all transistors in series have metallic tubes(50
percent metallic at here), the logic gate can not works appropriately. So this situation
we need to avoid in practical manufacture.
Simulation on leakage current for different metallic tube percentages are shown
at below.
Figure 5-6 Leakage at different metallic tube percent
Through simulation we know,the metallic tubes would increase the leakage cur-
rent significantly. Because if metallic tubes exist,this transistor can be treat as ohmic
short. So the number of series transistors are smaller than before. This situation will
cause high leakage. Moreover, the parallel numbers are not change. So we can get
the conclusion that the total leakage current would increased. And the experimental
result shows in Figure5-6 also obey this rule.
All in all,the exist of metallic tubes not only influence the logic function of cir-
cuit, but also cause degradation of leakage,power consumption and propagation de-
lay. So in future,efforts put on reducing the influence of metallic tubes are important.
5.3 Design full-adder based on ACCNT structure
Because of the benefit of asymmetrically correlated carbon nano-tube design (AC-
CNT), this design methodology can be used in lots of logic circuit for improving the
53
metallic tolerance.
This part writer use ACCNT to design full adder in 2*2,3*3,4*4 structure as an
example.
Figure 5-7 Fulladder in ACCNT structure
The structure at above is the full adder which is made of singe CNTFET. ACCNT
full-adder design need to use 2*2,3*3,4*4 sub-circuits to replace every transistor
in the above circuit. In order to design the circuit easily,writer create sub-circuits
for the three different structure separately.Then call this sub-circuit to replace the
single transistor. This is similar to what we did in Figure5-5. Through waveform
verification, the logic function of all these full-adder circuits have correct function.
The delay and power consumption for different ACCNT structure are concluded
in Table5-1. Definitely,the complicated ACCNT structure would lead to increased
propagation delay and power consumption which are shown in the table.In this de-
sign,the delay has been measured when one of input X=1,Y=Cin=0,and output S
change from 0 to 1. And the power is the average power in the simulation time.
54
Table5-1 Leakage at different metallic tube percent
So in actual ACCNT design,factors we need to consider are not only the metallic
tube tolerance of structure,but also the delay,power and leakage.It should not larger
than the maximum value that the logic gate can stand. So further research still need
to do, such as design new structure to make sure no degradation in CNTFET charac-
teristics,but it still has high metallic tube tolerance.
55
6 Conclusion
6.1 CNTFET library
Through extensive simulation and background reading,we can draw the conclusion
that 32nm CNTFET has its unique benefits in propagation delay,power consump-
tion and leakage current. The result can be shown in Chapter4. Compare these
characteristic in CNTFET with corresponding MOSFETs in different model(BSIM4
and PTM), CNTFET not only has the similar operating principle and transmission
performance, but also has relatively high switching speed,lower power consumption
and lower leakage current. Even comparing the delay and VTC in different input
patterns, CNTFET is always better than conventional transistor. All this characteris-
tic in CNTFETs still superior to the counterpart in BSIM4 and PTM MOSFETs in
different load capacitance.
Moreover,32nm CNTFETs have better voltage transfer characteristic than 45nm,
32nm, 22nm,16nm BSIM4 MOSFETs(simulation shows in section4.1.1). CNTFETs
has steep curve in transition region, which is because of the high gain it has. More-
over, this performance still exist in low supply voltage(0.3V).
Using an inverter logic gate as an example,writer analyse the influence of tem-
perature. Simulations are done from 0degree to 125degree. Simulation results are
shown it section4.1.2. We can found that CNTFETs still perform well in extreme
temperature(0degree and 125degree). But in MOSFET, the three important parame-
ters(delay, power, leakage) change a lot,so it is less stable than CNTFET.
Because of the slightly different structure in CNTFET, the factors which would
influence the characteristic would be different with traditional MOSFET. In this
project writer evaluate the influence of semiconducting tube numbers(assume no
metallic tube existed in this situation). Extensive simulation found that large tube
numbers will has a significant improvement in delay. Because it equals to increase
the width of MOSFET transistor, more electrons or holes can transfer in a unit
time. Moreover,the power consumption almost keep stable in different tube numbers.
These features are good to CNTFETs characteristic. But another aspect we need to
consider is the leakage current. The data analysis shows that the leakage current
would increase steadily with the increase of tube numbers. So in actual design,we
should consider and balance the drawbacks and benefits which bring from the large
number tubes. Then decide which factor is more important in certain design.
6.2 ACCNT analysis
In ACCNT analysis,calculation shows more CNTFETs in series would have high
metallic tube tolerance, more CNTFETs in parallel would have high driving current
and would not influence the probability of semiconducting tubes in the whole cir-
cuit. These benefits can let circuit works appropriately without removing the metal-
lic tubes. So it will be easy to realize. But problems still exist, such as the large area
waste when structure turns to be complicated.
Chapter5 shows when the ACCNT structure turn to be complicated,the delay,
power, leakage increase slightly. But compare with the unique benefit(high metallic
tube tolerance) is has, the slightly degraded characteristic can be neglected.
56
If at least one transistor is made of semiconducting tube,this logic circuit still
has correct function. But more metallic tubes would cause degradation in some
characteristic. For example,it would cause relatively large delay,power consumption
and leakage current when more metallic tubes grow in it. As expected, the simulation
result matches this rule perfectly.
Another benefit is that it is easy to fabricate in industrial field. Because we don’t
need to change the inside structure of transistor,we only need to change the outside
structure of circuit. In this project,a full adder has been design using this structure.
Although it has some drawbacks,the high metallic tube tolerance and ease of
implementation are more important than others. So in practical design, this novel
design method is popular in microelectronic.
57
7 Future work
The challenge for manufacturing field is the massive production. It is a long way to
go to increase the production efficiency and reduce the cost per transistor. Now many
researches focus on method of growth the nano-tubes and printing technology.
Another important issue in near future is minimizing the influence of metallic
tubes. Currently,the ways are used now can be divided into two parts:etching metallic
tubes by using chemical material;changing the structure of circuit or transistor. But
both of these approaches have its problems. For example,semiconducting tubes may
be destoried,metallic tubes can not be removed completely,the space of circuit would
be increased. So future researches will be interested on minimizing these kind of
technical issue.
Moreover,in ACCNT design analysis,although this structure improve the metallic
tube tolerance efficiently,drawbacks would appear at same time,such as the slightly
increased delay, leakage current and power consumption. So efforts on reducing
these disadvantages are very important.
58
References
[1] Fabrizio Lombardi MinSu Choi Geunho Cho, Yong-Bin Kim. Performance
evaluation of cnfet-based logic gates.
[2] Elec. Mag. G.E. Moore. The complexity for minimum component costs has
increased at a rate of roughly a factor of two per year. 2006.
[3] M. Horowitz, E. Alon, D. Patil, S. Naffziger, Rajesh Kumar, and K. Bernstein.
Scaling, power, and the future of cmos. In Electron Devices Meeting, 2005.
IEDM Technical Digest. IEEE International, pages 7 pp. –15, dec. 2005.
[4] Sumit Kumar. Ald growth of a novel mixed-phase barrier for seedless copper
electroplating applications. 2008.
[5] R. Chau, S. Datta, M. Doczy, B. Doyle, B. Jin, J. Kavalieros, A. Majumdar,
M. Metz, and M. Radosavljevic. Benchmarking nanotechnology for high-
performance and low-power logic transistor applications. Nanotechnology,
IEEE Transactions on, 4(2):153 – 158, march 2005.
[6] Yuan Taur, D.A. Buchanan, Wei Chen, D.J. Frank, K.E. Ismail, Shih-Hsien Lo,
G.A. Sai-Halasz, R.G. Viswanathan, H.-J.C. Wann, S.J. Wind, and Hon-Sum
Wong. Cmos scaling into the nanometer regime. Proceedings of the IEEE,
85(4):486 –504, apr 1997.
[7] C. Fiegna, H. Iwai, T. Wada, M. Saito, E. Sangiorgi, and B. Ricco. Scaling the
mos transistor below 0.1 mu;m: methodology, device structures, and technol-
ogy requirements. Electron Devices, IEEE Transactions on, 41(6):941 –951,
jun 1994.
[8] Y. Taur, Y.-J. Mii, D. J. Frank, H.-S. Wong, D. A. Buchanan, S. J. Wind, S. A.
Rishton, G. A. Sai-Halasz, and E. J. Nowak. Cmos scaling into the 21st cen-
tury: 0.1 x00b5;m and beyond. IBM Journal of Research and Development,
39(1.2):245 –260, jan. 1995.
[9] F. Stern and W. E. Howard. Properties of Semiconductor Surface Inversion
Layers in the Electric Quantum Limit. Physical Review, 163:816–835, Novem-
ber 1967.
[10] Yasuyuki and Ohkura. Quantum effects in si n-mos inversion layer at high
substrate concentration. Solid-State Electronics, 33(12):1581 – 1585, 1990.
[11] R. Chau, S. Datta, M. Doczy, J. Kavalieros, and M. Metz. Gate dielectric
scaling for high-performance cmos: from sio2 to high-k. In Gate Insulator,
2003. IWGI 2003. Extended Abstracts of International Workshop on, pages 124
– 126, nov. 2003.
[12] S.E. Thompson, M. Armstrong, C. Auth, S. Cea, R. Chau, G. Glass, T. Hoff-
man, J. Klaus, Zhiyong Ma, B. Mcintyre, A. Murthy, B. Obradovic, L. Shifren,
S. Sivakumar, S. Tyagi, T. Ghani, K. Mistry, M. Bohr, and Y. El-Mansy. A
59
logic nanotechnology featuring strained-silicon. Electron Device Letters, IEEE,
25(4):191 – 193, april 2004.
[13] R.Chau et al. silicon nano-transistors for logic applications. 2003.
[14] Y. Varthamanan and V. Kannan. Current voltage characteristics of carbon nano
tube field effect transistor. In Recent Advances in Space Technology Services
and Climate Change (RSTSCC), 2010, pages 283 –284, nov. 2010.
[15] Paribello Rachel Poupore Parsian Katal Mohseni, David. Carbon nanotube and
the carbon nanotube field effect transistor. 2005.
[16] Tijs; Yao Zhen; Grifoni Milena; Dekker Cees Postma, Henk W. Ch.; Teepen.
Carbon nanotube single-electron transistors at room temperature. 2001.
[17] Verschueren Cees Dekker Sander J. Tans, Alwin R. M. Room-temperature
transistor based on a single carbon nanotube. 1998.
[18] Zhihong Chen, D. Farmer, Sheng Xu, R. Gordon, P. Avouris, and J. Appen-
zeller. Externally assembled gate-all-around carbon nanotube field-effect tran-
sistor. Electron Device Letters, IEEE, 29(2):183 –185, feb. 2008.
[19] T.J. Kazmierski, Dafeng Zhou, B.M. Al-Hashimi, and P. Ashburn. Numerically
efficient modeling of cnt transistors with ballistic and nonballistic effects for
circuit simulation. Nanotechnology, IEEE Transactions on, 9(1):99 –107, jan.
2010.
[20] Yiming Li, David Mann, Marco Rolandi, Woong Kim, Ant Ural, Steven Hung,
Ali Javey, Jien Cao, Dunwei Wang, Erhan Yenilmez, Qian Wang, James F.
Gibbons, Yoshio Nishi, and Hongjie Dai. Preferential growth of semiconduct-
ing single-walled carbon nanotubes by a plasma enhanced cvd method. Nano
Letters, 4(2):317–321, 2004.
[21] A. Lin, N. Patil, Hai Wei, S. Mitra, and H.-S.P. Wong. Accnt x2014;a metallic-
cnt-tolerant design methodology for carbon-nanotube vlsi: Concepts and exper-
imental demonstration. Electron Devices, IEEE Transactions on, 56(12):2969
–2978, dec. 2009.
[22] Ali Javey, Jing Guo, Damon B. Farmer, Qian Wang, Erhan Yenilmez, Roy G.
Gordon, Mark Lundstrom, and Hongjie Dai. Self-aligned ballistic molecular
transistors and electrically parallel nanotube arrays, 2004.
[23] R. Ashraf, M. Chrzanowska-Jeske, and S.G. Narendra. Functional yield esti-
mation of carbon nanotube-based logic gates in the presence of defects. Nan-
otechnology, IEEE Transactions on, 9(6):687 –700, nov. 2010.
[24] Rehman Ashraf, Rajeev K. Nain, Malgorzata Chrzanowska-Jeske, and Siva G.
Narendra. Design methodology for carbon nanotube based circuits in the pres-
ence of metallic tubes. In Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE/ACM International
Symposium on Nanoscale Architectures, Nanoarch ’10, pages 71–76, Piscat-
away, NJ, USA, 2010. IEEE Press.
60
[25] Jie Deng Albert Lin, Gordon Wan and Prof. H-S Philip Wong. A quick user
guide on stanford university carbon nanotube field effect transistors (cnfet)
hspice model. 2009.
[26] Mohan Dunga Jin He Weidong Liu Kanyu M. Cao Xiaodong Jin Jeff J. Ou
Mansun Chan Ali M. Niknejad Chenming Hu, Xuemei Xi. BSIM4.3.0 MOS-
FET Model- Usera˛r´s Manual. 2003.
[27] Jie Deng, N. Patil, Koungmin Ryu, A. Badmaev, Chongwu Zhou, S. Mitra, and
H.-S.P. Wong. Carbon nanotube transistor circuits: Circuit-level performance
benchmarking and design options for living with imperfections. In Solid-State
Circuits Conference, 2007. ISSCC 2007. Digest of Technical Papers. IEEE In-
ternational, pages 70 –588, feb. 2007.
[28] Anantha Chandrakasan Borivoje Nikolic Jan M, Rabaey. Digital Integrated
Circuits. Prentice-Hall India, 2003.
[29] N. Patil, Jie Deng, S. Mitra, and H.-S.P. Wong. Circuit-level performance
benchmarking and scalability analysis of carbon nanotube transistor circuits.
Nanotechnology, IEEE Transactions on, 8(1):37 –45, jan. 2009.
[30] N. Patil, Jie Deng, A. Lin, H.-S.P. Wong, and S. Mitra. Design methods for mis-
aligned and mispositioned carbon-nanotube immune circuits. Computer-Aided
Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, IEEE Transactions on, 27(10):1725
–1736, oct. 2008.
[31] R. Ashraf, M. Chrzanowska-Jeske, and S.G. Narendra. Functional yield esti-
mation of carbon nanotube-based logic gates in the presence of defects. Nan-
otechnology, IEEE Transactions on, 9(6):687 –700, nov. 2010.
[32] M.H. Ben-Jamaa, K. Mohanram, and G. De Micheli. An efficient gate library
for ambipolar cntfet logic. Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and
Systems, IEEE Transactions on, 30(2):242 –255, feb. 2011.
[33] David Weste, Neil H. E;Harris. CMOS VLSI design : a circuits and systems
perspective. Boston : Pearson/Addison-Wesley, 2005.
[34] Yiming Li, David Mann, Marco Rolandi, Woong Kim, Ant Ural, Steven Hung,
Ali Javey, Jien Cao, Dunwei Wang, Erhan Yenilmez, Qian Wang, James F.
Gibbons, Yoshio Nishi, and Hongjie Dai. Preferential growth of semiconduct-
ing single-walled carbon nanotubes by a plasma enhanced cvd method. Nano
Letters, 4(2):317–321, 2004.
61
Appendix
Code for ACCNT 4*4 full adder circuit:
************************************************************
**************************************************
.options POST
.options AUTOSTOP
.options INGOLD=2 DCON=1
.options GSHUNT=1e-12 RMIN=1e-15
.options ABSTOL=1e-5 ABSVDC=1e-4
.options RELTOL=1e-2 RELVDC=1e-2
.options NUMDGT=4 PIVOT=13
.param TEMP=27
***************************************************
************************************************************
.TITLE ’IDS vs VGS for CNFET’
Include relevant model files
.lib ’CNFET.lib’ CNFET
*******Beginning of circuit and device definitions**********
**************Supplies and voltage parameter:****************
.param vdd=0.7
**********Some CNFET parameters:***************
.param Ccsd=0 CoupleRatio=0
.param m_cnt=1 Efo=0.6
.param Wg=0 Cb=40e-12
.param Lg=32e-9 Lgef=100e-9
.param Vfn=0 Vfp=0
.param m=19 n=0
.param Hox=4e-9 Kox=16
.param delay =0.1ns
.data devinf cload
100f
10f
0
.enddata
**************Define power supply***************************
Vdd Vdd 0 vdd
VA1 a 0 pulse (0 vdd 0 delay delay 4n 9.2n)
VB1 b 0 pulse (0 vdd 1n delay delay 9n 19.2n)
VC1 ci 0 pulse (0 vdd 1n delay delay 18n 36.2n)
*************End define power supply************************
******************** *4model_pfet *************************
.subckt pfetmodel vin up down Vdd
*PCNTFET
XCNT_1 node1 vin up Vdd PCNFET Lch=Lg Lgeff=’Lgef’ Lss=32e-9 Ldd=32e-9
+ Kgate=’Kox’ Tox=’Hox’ Csub=’Cb’ Vfbp=’Vfp’ Dout=0 Sout=0 Pitch=20e-9 n1=m n2=n tubes=3
XCNT_2 node2 vin node1 Vdd PCNFET Lch=Lg Lgeff=’Lgef’ Lss=32e-9 Ldd=32e-9
+ Kgate=’Kox’ Tox=’Hox’ Csub=’Cb’ Vfbp=’Vfp’ Dout=0 Sout=0 Pitch=20e-9 n1=m n2=n tubes=3
XCNT_3 node3 vin node2 Vdd PCNFET Lch=Lg Lgeff=’Lgef’ Lss=32e-9 Ldd=32e-9
+ Kgate=’Kox’ Tox=’Hox’ Csub=’Cb’ Vfbp=’Vfp’ Dout=0 Sout=0 Pitch=20e-9 n1=m n2=n tubes=3
XCNT_4 down vin node3 Vdd PCNFET Lch=Lg Lgeff=’Lgef’ Lss=32e-9 Ldd=32e-9
+ Kgate=’Kox’ Tox=’Hox’ Csub=’Cb’ Vfbp=’Vfp’ Dout=0 Sout=0 Pitch=20e-9 n1=m n2=n tubes=3
XCNT_5 node4 vin up Vdd PCNFET Lch=Lg Lgeff=’Lgef’ Lss=32e-9 Ldd=32e-9
+ Kgate=’Kox’ Tox=’Hox’ Csub=’Cb’ Vfbp=’Vfp’ Dout=0 Sout=0 Pitch=20e-9 n1=m n2=n tubes=3
XCNT_6 node5 vin node4 Vdd PCNFET Lch=Lg Lgeff=’Lgef’ Lss=32e-9 Ldd=32e-9
+ Kgate=’Kox’ Tox=’Hox’ Csub=’Cb’ Vfbp=’Vfp’ Dout=0 Sout=0 Pitch=20e-9 n1=m n2=n tubes=3
XCNT_7 node6 vin node5 Vdd PCNFET Lch=Lg Lgeff=’Lgef’ Lss=32e-9 Ldd=32e-9
+ Kgate=’Kox’ Tox=’Hox’ Csub=’Cb’ Vfbp=’Vfp’ Dout=0 Sout=0 Pitch=20e-9 n1=m n2=n tubes=3
XCNT_8 down vin node6 Vdd PCNFET Lch=Lg Lgeff=’Lgef’ Lss=32e-9 Ldd=32e-9
+ Kgate=’Kox’ Tox=’Hox’ Csub=’Cb’ Vfbp=’Vfp’ Dout=0 Sout=0 Pitch=20e-9 n1=m n2=n tubes=3
62
XCNT_9 node7 vin up Vdd PCNFET Lch=Lg Lgeff=’Lgef’ Lss=32e-9 Ldd=32e-9
+ Kgate=’Kox’ Tox=’Hox’ Csub=’Cb’ Vfbp=’Vfp’ Dout=0 Sout=0 Pitch=20e-9 n1=m n2=n tubes=3
XCNT_10 node8 vin node7 Vdd PCNFET Lch=Lg Lgeff=’Lgef’ Lss=32e-9 Ldd=32e-9
+ Kgate=’Kox’ Tox=’Hox’ Csub=’Cb’ Vfbp=’Vfp’ Dout=0 Sout=0 Pitch=20e-9 n1=m n2=n tubes=3
XCNT_11 node9 vin node8 Vdd PCNFET Lch=Lg Lgeff=’Lgef’ Lss=32e-9 Ldd=32e-9
+ Kgate=’Kox’ Tox=’Hox’ Csub=’Cb’ Vfbp=’Vfp’ Dout=0 Sout=0 Pitch=20e-9 n1=m n2=n tubes=3
XCNT_12 down vin node9 Vdd PCNFET Lch=Lg Lgeff=’Lgef’ Lss=32e-9 Ldd=32e-9
+ Kgate=’Kox’ Tox=’Hox’ Csub=’Cb’ Vfbp=’Vfp’ Dout=0 Sout=0 Pitch=20e-9 n1=m n2=n tubes=3
XCNT_13 node11 vin up Vdd PCNFET Lch=Lg Lgeff=’Lgef’ Lss=32e-9 Ldd=32e-9
+ Kgate=’Kox’ Tox=’Hox’ Csub=’Cb’ Vfbp=’Vfp’ Dout=0 Sout=0 Pitch=20e-9 n1=m n2=n tubes=3
XCNT_14 node12 vin node11 Vdd PCNFET Lch=Lg Lgeff=’Lgef’ Lss=32e-9 Ldd=32e-9
+ Kgate=’Kox’ Tox=’Hox’ Csub=’Cb’ Vfbp=’Vfp’ Dout=0 Sout=0 Pitch=20e-9 n1=m n2=n tubes=3
XCNT_15 node13 vin node12 Vdd PCNFET Lch=Lg Lgeff=’Lgef’ Lss=32e-9 Ldd=32e-9
+ Kgate=’Kox’ Tox=’Hox’ Csub=’Cb’ Vfbp=’Vfp’ Dout=0 Sout=0 Pitch=20e-9 n1=m n2=n tubes=3
XCNT_16 down vin node13 Vdd PCNFET Lch=Lg Lgeff=’Lgef’ Lss=32e-9 Ldd=32e-9
+ Kgate=’Kox’ Tox=’Hox’ Csub=’Cb’ Vfbp=’Vfp’ Dout=0 Sout=0 Pitch=20e-9 n1=m n2=n tubes=3
.ends
********************4*4model_nfet*************************
* NCHTFET
.subckt nfetmodel vin up down 0
XCNTn_1 up vin node1 0 NCNFET Lch=Lg Lgeff=’Lgef’ Lss=32e-9 Ldd=32e-9
+ Kgate=’Kox’ Tox=’Hox’ Csub=’Cb’ Vfbn=’Vfn’ Dout=0 Sout=0 Pitch=20e-9 n1=m n2=n tubes=3
XCNTn_2 node1 vin node2 0 NCNFET Lch=Lg Lgeff=’Lgef’ Lss=32e-9 Ldd=32e-9
+ Kgate=’Kox’ Tox=’Hox’ Csub=’Cb’ Vfbn=’Vfn’ Dout=0 Sout=0 Pitch=20e-9 n1=m n2=n tubes=3
XCNTn_3 node2 vin node3 0 NCNFET Lch=Lg Lgeff=’Lgef’ Lss=32e-9 Ldd=32e-9
+ Kgate=’Kox’ Tox=’Hox’ Csub=’Cb’ Vfbn=’Vfn’ Dout=0 Sout=0 Pitch=20e-9 n1=m n2=n tubes=3
XCNTn_4 node3 vin down 0 NCNFET Lch=Lg Lgeff=’Lgef’ Lss=32e-9 Ldd=32e-9
+ Kgate=’Kox’ Tox=’Hox’ Csub=’Cb’ Vfbn=’Vfn’ Dout=0 Sout=0 Pitch=20e-9 n1=m n2=n tubes=3
XCNTn_5 up vin node4 0 NCNFET Lch=Lg Lgeff=’Lgef’ Lss=32e-9 Ldd=32e-9
+ Kgate=’Kox’ Tox=’Hox’ Csub=’Cb’ Vfbn=’Vfn’ Dout=0 Sout=0 Pitch=20e-9 n1=m n2=n tubes=3
XCNTn_6 node4 vin node5 0 NCNFET Lch=Lg Lgeff=’Lgef’ Lss=32e-9 Ldd=32e-9
+ Kgate=’Kox’ Tox=’Hox’ Csub=’Cb’ Vfbn=’Vfn’ Dout=0 Sout=0 Pitch=20e-9 n1=m n2=n tubes=3
XCNTn_7 node5 vin node6 0 NCNFET Lch=Lg Lgeff=’Lgef’ Lss=32e-9 Ldd=32e-9
+ Kgate=’Kox’ Tox=’Hox’ Csub=’Cb’ Vfbn=’Vfn’ Dout=0 Sout=0 Pitch=20e-9 n1=m n2=n tubes=3
XCNTn_8 node6 vin down 0 NCNFET Lch=Lg Lgeff=’Lgef’ Lss=32e-9 Ldd=32e-9
+ Kgate=’Kox’ Tox=’Hox’ Csub=’Cb’ Vfbn=’Vfn’ Dout=0 Sout=0 Pitch=20e-9 n1=m n2=n tubes=3
XCNTn_9 up vin node7 0 NCNFET Lch=Lg Lgeff=’Lgef’ Lss=32e-9 Ldd=32e-9
+ Kgate=’Kox’ Tox=’Hox’ Csub=’Cb’ Vfbn=’Vfn’ Dout=0 Sout=0 Pitch=20e-9 n1=m n2=n tubes=3
XCNTn_10 node7 vin node8 0 NCNFET Lch=Lg Lgeff=’Lgef’ Lss=32e-9 Ldd=32e-9
+ Kgate=’Kox’ Tox=’Hox’ Csub=’Cb’ Vfbn=’Vfn’ Dout=0 Sout=0 Pitch=20e-9 n1=m n2=n tubes=3
XCNTn_11 node8 vin node9 0 NCNFET Lch=Lg Lgeff=’Lgef’ Lss=32e-9 Ldd=32e-9
+ Kgate=’Kox’ Tox=’Hox’ Csub=’Cb’ Vfbn=’Vfn’ Dout=0 Sout=0 Pitch=20e-9 n1=m n2=n tubes=3
XCNTn_12 node9 vin down 0 NCNFET Lch=Lg Lgeff=’Lgef’ Lss=32e-9 Ldd=32e-9
+ Kgate=’Kox’ Tox=’Hox’ Csub=’Cb’ Vfbn=’Vfn’ Dout=0 Sout=0 Pitch=20e-9 n1=m n2=n tubes=3
XCNTn_13 up vin node10 0 NCNFET Lch=Lg Lgeff=’Lgef’ Lss=32e-9 Ldd=32e-9
+ Kgate=’Kox’ Tox=’Hox’ Csub=’Cb’ Vfbn=’Vfn’ Dout=0 Sout=0 Pitch=20e-9 n1=m n2=n tubes=3
XCNTn_14 node10 vin node11 0 NCNFET Lch=Lg Lgeff=’Lgef’ Lss=32e-9 Ldd=32e-9
+ Kgate=’Kox’ Tox=’Hox’ Csub=’Cb’ Vfbn=’Vfn’ Dout=0 Sout=0 Pitch=20e-9 n1=m n2=n tubes=3
63
XCNTn_15 node11 vin node12 0 NCNFET Lch=Lg Lgeff=’Lgef’ Lss=32e-9 Ldd=32e-9
+ Kgate=’Kox’ Tox=’Hox’ Csub=’Cb’ Vfbn=’Vfn’ Dout=0 Sout=0 Pitch=20e-9 n1=m n2=n tubes=3
XCNTn_16 node12 vin down 0 NCNFET Lch=Lg Lgeff=’Lgef’ Lss=32e-9 Ldd=32e-9
+ Kgate=’Kox’ Tox=’Hox’ Csub=’Cb’ Vfbn=’Vfn’ Dout=0 Sout=0 Pitch=20e-9 n1=m n2=n tubes=3
.ends
*******************NAND2 MODEL **************************
.subckt nand_2 x y out Vdd 0
Xmodel1 x Vdd out Vdd pfetmodel
Xmodel2 y Vdd out Vdd pfetmodel
Xmodel3 x out node1 0 nfetmodel
Xmodel4 y node1 0 0 nfetmodel
.ends
***************NOR2 MODEL ********************************
.subckt nor_2 va vb Vdd out
Xmodel1 vb Vdd node Vdd pfetmodel
Xmodel2 va node out Vdd pfetmodel
Xmodel3 va out 0 0 nfetmodel
Xmodel4 vb out 0 0 nfetmodel
.ends
********** Y=’(C+A*B) SUBCIRCUIT**************************
.subckt _XOR va vb vc out Vdd
Xmodel1 vc Vdd node1 Vdd pfetmodel
Xmodel2 vb node1 out Vdd pfetmodel
Xmodel3 va node1 out Vdd pfetmodel
Xmodel4 vc out 0 0 nfetmodel
Xmodel5 va out node2 0 nfetmodel
Xmodel6 vb node2 0 0 nfetmodel
.ends
*******XOR MODEL*********************************
.subkt xor x y out Vdd
Xnor2 x y Vdd out1 nor_2
X_x x y out1 out Vdd _XOR
.ends
*******FULL ADDER MODEL*********************************
.subckt xfd x y ci out cout Vdd
Xxor_1 x y node1 Vdd xor
Xxor_2 node1 ci out Vdd xor
Xnand_1 ci node1 node2 Vdd 0 nand_2
Xnand_2 x y node3 Vdd 0 nand_2
Xnand_3 node3 node2 cout Vdd 0 nand_2
.ends
*******CALL FULL ADDER MODEL****************************
X_fulladder a b ci out cout Vdd xfd
c1 out 0 10f
*******MEASRURE DELAY,POWER*****************************
.meas tran pow AVG power
.meas tran tdelay trig v(a) val=’vdd/2’ rise=1
+targ v(out) val=’vdd/2’ rise=1
.tran 0.5n 9n
.ends
.end
64
