I 
 
Summary 
 
The first aim of this project is to develop a new Knowledge Discovery (KD) Workbench for Structured 
data. This is a new platform that provides an integrated framework for multi-relational learning methods 
(such as Inductive Logic Programming, First Order Decision Trees) and provides interface to existing 
data mining workbenches and systems. The second aim is to develop a common file format to allow 
interoperability of the different systems and their proprietary file formats. 
 
The objectives of the project as following: 
? Studying relevant literature on KD and Logical Programming (LP) and focus on some Structured 
data that is the foundation of studying these different file formats 
? Learning the different input files, which cover all integrated key state-of-the-art methods, is helpful 
to develop common file 
? Creating a common file that is used to store data from other file formats and also can transfer data 
to these file formats 
? Studying previous workbenches can provide a structure of developing a new workbench, which 
could maximize the advantages and minimize the drawback 
? Designing a friendly interface that can make a better work or study environment 
 
This project is mainly Type I (software development), as 70%, and also involves Type II (Investigatory), 
as 30%. At the beginning of the project, the background knowledge of structured data and each key 
state-of-the-art method have been investigated, which is the foundation for developing workbench. After 
that, the mainly work is programming to realize the functions of interface and background of the 
workbench. 
 
JSP +Web Standard methods have been used to develop the workbench. After users upload available 
files, common file would be generated, and at the same time other systemsÕ files would also be created 
by the common file. In the second page, users can amend data with the prompts in the accessory panel of 
the page. Thirdly, the result can be seen after users choose one of the algorithms to run. Finally, the 
results, the amended data file and common file can be downloaded. The minimum criterion in Research 
Review has been completed and partial second and third criterions also have been done. 
 
The following list is the important elements that have been accomplished: 
? Common file can store all information from any available input files to make a common file format 
where these input files can share their data and also keep their own specific parameters 
? Web Standard workbench that makes the connection convenient in any operating systems and 
without install any software 
? A friendly interface of the workbench based on the technique of HTML+CSS+JavaScript 
? Giving correlative prompts when amending data 
? Successfully running the systems in the workbench 
  
II 
 
Abstract 
 
The project introduces an integrated Knowledge Discovery Workbench for Structured Data, which 
includes multiple data mining systems such as Progol, ACE, 1BC, Prism and Weka. The workbench not 
only can run each system successfully, but also provide a common file, which can help client transfer 
their data files into other file formats automatically. During client operate the workbench, a list of useful 
prompts will be provided to amend data efficiently. In addition, J2EE has been used to develop the 
workbench, which means this workbench can be provided online. Any client can use this workbench 
through Internet without install these data mining systems. For analyzing a data file, there are basically 
three steps that are uploading, amending and results need to be operated in the workbench. For changing 
data format, basically four steps are needed, which are uploading, amending, saving and result. It is 
always easy to be operated. Therefore, based on the reasonable control panels design, this workbench is 
absolutely useful, helpful and friendly for users to analyze data. 
 
  
III 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
I am especially grateful to my supervisor Oliver Ray for his guidance, support and encouragement 
throughout the project. 
 
Thanks to Bin Li for providing free J2EE Education Video. 
 
I thank to Jun He for her many sacrifices during the project. 
 
I am grateful to my family for their constant support and encouragement. 
 
  
IV 
 
Contents 
1 INTRODUCTION  1 
1.1 Background  1 
1.2 Motivation  2 
1.3 Challenge  2 
1.4 Aims and Objectives  2 
1.5 Outline  3 
2 BACKGROUND  4 
2.1 Logical Foundation  4 
2.1.1 Concepts of Clausal Logic  4 
2.1.2 The Syntax of Clausal Logic  6 
2.1.3 The Semantics of Clausal Logic  6 
2.1.4 Logic Programming  7 
2.2 Machine Learning Representations  8 
2.2.1 Attribute Value Learning  8 
2.2.2 Inductive Logic Programming  8 
2.3 Learning Systems  9 
2.3.1 Progol  9 
2.3.2 ACE (Tilde and Warmr)  11 
2.3.3 Prism  13 
2.3.4 Weka  13 
2.3.5 1BC  14 
2.4 Conclusion  15 
3 PREVIOUS WORKS ON KD WORKBENCHES  16 
3.1 WEKA  16 
3.2 ACE Data Mining  16 
3.3 Oracle Data Mining  17 
3.4 Orange Data Mining  17 
3.5 BET System  17 
3.6 Conclusion  18 
4 METHODOLOGY  19 
4.1 Developing Languages  19 
4.2 Needs analysis  19 
4.2.1 Common File  19 
4.2.2 Inputs  19 
4.2.3 Middle Result  20 
4.2.4 Outputs  20 
4.2.5 Files Management  21 
4.3 Workbench Design  21 
4.3.1 Common File Format  21 
4.3.2 Main Flow Chart of Workbench  24 
4.3.3 Upload and Download File Flow Chart  25 
4.3.4 Converting Data Flow Chart  25 
V 
 
4.3.5 Summary  25 
4.4 Test Plans  26 
4.5 Conclusion  26 
5 RESULTS  27 
5.1 Environment  27 
5.2 Common File  27 
5.3 Interface of Workbench  31 
5.3.1 Home Page  31 
5.3.2 Amending Page  32 
5.3.3 Result Page  33 
5.3.4 Summary  33 
5.4 Background of Workbench  34 
5.4.1 Converting Data  34 
5.4.2 Calling Systems  36 
5.4.3 Summary  36 
5.5 Each System Results  36 
5.5.1 Progol Results  37 
5.5.2 ACE Results  37 
5.5.3 1BC Results  39 
5.5.4 WEKA Results  41 
5.5.5 Prism Results  41 
5.5.6 Common Results 43 
5.5.7 Summary  43 
6 CONCLUSIONS  44 
6.1 Common File Format 44 
6.2 Structure of the Workbench  44 
6.3 Evaluation  44 
6.3.1 Web Standard Workbench  44 
6.3.2 Converting Data File  44 
6.3.3 Exception  45 
7 FUTURE WORKS  46 
7.1 Extension of the Workbench  46 
7.1.1 Workbench  46 
7.1.2 Common File  46 
7.2 Database Services  46 
7.3 Conclusion  46 
BIBLIOGRAPGY  47 
APPENDIX A: Source Code (Partial)  49 
 
  
VI 
 
List of Figures 
Figure 1.1 Main functional phases of the KD process [7]  1 
Figure 2 ACE system  12 
Figure 3 Tilde output file - bongard.ptree  12 
Figure 4 weather.arff 13 
Figure 5 Input File Flow Chart  20 
Figure 6 Middle Result Flow Chart  20 
Figure 7 Output Files Flow Chart  21 
Figure 8 CDF  22 
Figure 9 Main Flow Chart of Workbench  24 
Figure 10 Upload and Download File Flow Chart  25 
Figure 11 Converting Data Flow Chart  25 
Figure 12 Progol Clauses  27 
Figure 13 Common Format for Progol  28 
Figure 14 ACE Clauses  28 
Figure 15 Common Format for ACE  29 
Figure 16 1BC Clauses  29 
Figure 17 Common Format for 1BC  29 
Figure 18 Prism Clauses  30 
Figure 19 Common Format for Prism  30 
Figure 20 WEKA Data  30 
Figure 21 Common Format for WEKA  30 
Figure 22 CF to Progol  31 
Figure 23 Home Page  32 
Figure 24 Amending Page  33 
Figure 25 Result Page  34 
Figure 26 Converting Data into Common File  35 
Figure 27 Top Tags  36 
Figure 28 Progol Result  37 
Figure 29 Amending Page for ACE  38 
Figure 30 ACE Prompts  38 
Figure 31 Result of ACE (Tilde)  39 
Figure 32 Amending Page for 1BC  40 
Figure 33 1BC Prompts  40 
Figure 34 Result of 1BC  41 
Figure 35 Amending Page for WEKA  41 
Figure 36 Result of WEKA J48  41 
Figure 37 Amending Page for Prism  42 
Figure 38 Result of Prism  42 
Figure 39 Amending Page for Common File  43 
Figure 40 Exception Page  45 
 
 
1 
 
1 INTRODUCTION 
1.1 Background 
Information has played an important role in our lives today. Hundreds of thousands of new information 
are generated in every second and include a majority of connotative but more effective knowledge for 
people, which can help us to make a giant improvement. Data Mining (DM) methods then are used in 
the process, which we called Knowledge Discovery (KD), to reveal new pieces of connotative 
knowledge from enormous databases [7]. Because the amount of information was huge, we need to 
analyze the data with the help of computers instead of labour power. Therefore, structured data or 
suitable representation of data, which can be used by computers, will be required before KD. 
Attribute-value Learning (AVL) is one of the most common structured learning representations. 
Learning representation also encompasses Boolean Logic Learning (BLL), Multi-Instance Learning 
(MIL), Multi-Relational Learning (MRL) and Inductive Logic Programming (ILP). In this project, 
structured data mainly indicate the five data learning. As shown in Figure 1.1, it can generally describe 
the process of KD and some tools will be used during the process, which means users could have 
interaction with the system. There is also a loop, which is shown in wider line, to make a dynamic 
feedback loop [7]. Nowadays, the similar structure of KD process is still used, like Weka [9]. 
 
Figure 1.1 Main functional phases of the KD process [7] 
 
One of the sufficient methods for KD is AVL, even if it has some limitations when they represent 
relationships between items. A number of algorithms have been developed and applied in both academia 
and business for wide variety structured learning. If most of these algorithms can be integrated into a 
single cohesive piece of software, it would be very helpful to analyze complex data. Workbench could 
be the best approach to do this. There are some subsistent workbenches for AVL that bring a wide 
variety of different AVL techniques into a single environment. One of the most famous workbenches is 
Databases 
Warehousing 
Data cleaning Data mining 
Outcome 
visualization 
Report 
Monitor 
Action 
Visualization 
Tools 
Data Mining 
Tools 
Query Tools 
 
Fuzzy Set 
Machine Learning 
Neural networks 
Statistics 
2 
 
the Waikato Environment for Knowledge Analysis (Weka), which was developed and distributed by the 
University of Waikato [9]. In addition, ACE is another successful data mining workbench that can be 
used at MRL and ILP level [2]. It also provides a common interface to a number of data mining systems, 
like Tilde and Warmr. There are several advantages of workbench. First reason is that using workbench 
can unify the learning representation. Secondly, workbench can supply a visual interface, which can 
provide an intuitive way to execute different functions of the workbench, rather than using command 
line interface. Thirdly, the workbench could be assembled by many algorithms. 
 
1.2 Motivation 
After learning couple of data mining systems, some disadvantages can easily be found. For example, all 
of them have different file format, even some of them deal with same type of data. In addition, some 
data mining system still use command line to operate, like Progol and ACE. It is very inconvenient. 
Based on such drawbacks, although these workbenches or systems are already successful, the more 
powerful workbench is still required. 
 
This project not only has been considered using them, but also using other kinds of structured learning 
representations. Hence, more famous workbenches or systems have been studied in details, like 1BC and 
Prism. Currently, there is no such workbench that can provide an integrated platform to suit all learning 
representations and to convert data format between different systems or algorithms. Basically, the new 
workbench is considered to fix the drawbacks in this project. At the same time, it should keep these 
advantages as many as possible. 
 
1.3 Challenge 
First of all, the new workbench needs a new structure instead of the traditional one. Progol, ACE, 1BC, 
Prism and Weka are integrated in this workbench. Therefore, finding a suitable structure of the 
workbench is the first challenge. Secondly, for meeting the demands of integrating many systems, the 
workbench needs having a most general file format that can store the data from different file format, and 
also can convert data into different file format. Finding a common file format would be the one of the 
hardest challenge in this project. Thirdly, after the common file has been defined, the next challenge 
would be to convert data. 100 present of accuracy rate should be guaranteed during the conversions. 
Fourthly, for more convenient, the workbench should provide more detail prompts to users during their 
uploading and amending files. How the workbench checks the warnings and errors of their files is also a 
challenge. Finally, the last challenge in this project would be running the data file using specific systems. 
These systems require different input before users can get result. How to handle the interactivity 
between the users and the systems is the last challenge in this project. 
 
1.4 Aims and Objectives 
The first aim of this project is to develop a new Knowledge Discovery (KD) Workbench for Structured 
data. This is a new platform that provides an integrated the key state-of-the-art methods, such as Progol, 
ACE, 1BC, Prism and Weka. Therefore, the workbench will run with different Inductive Logical 
Programming (ILP) and Attribute Value (AV) learning systems. In addition, since each system or 
3 
 
algorithm has their own data format, the second aim is to realize the conversion between different file 
formats based on common file. 
 
In order to fulfill the aims above, the objectives of the project as following: 
? Studying relevant literature on KD and Logical Programming (LP) and focus on some Structured 
data that is the foundation of studying these different file formats 
? Learning the different input files, which cover all integrated key state-of-the-art methods, is helpful 
to develop common file 
? Creating a common file that is used to store data from other file formats and also can transfer data 
to these file formats 
? Studying previous workbenches can provide a structure of developing a new workbench, which 
could maximize the advantages and minimize the drawback 
? Designing a friendly interface that can make a better work or study environment 
 
1.5 Outline 
Chapter 1 introduces the background of the KD and structured data. Some successful data mining 
systems is described to elicit the motivation of the project. Based on the new workbench, some 
challenges are listed to show the level of difficult of developing the workbench. Finally, aims and 
objectives are given. 
 
Chapter 2 explains the machine learning representations and the hierarchy of them and also introduces 
the propositionalization. Some systems are described focus on their data format. 
 
Chapter 3 illustrates some famous previous works on KD workbench. 
 
Chapter 4 demonstrates the methodology, which includes Needs Analysis and Detailed Design. 
 
Chapter 5 illustrates all the result found by the project, which include the interface and background of 
the workbench. A number of figures explain the results. 
 
Chapter 6 summaries the main conclusion of the thesis based on the common file format, structure of the 
workbench and evaluations. 
 
Chapter 7 lists several future works for improving the workbench. 
  
4 
 
2 BACKGROUND 
The general knowledge of structured data learning is introduced in this chapter, which includes machine 
leaning representations and logical programming. In addition, there are five learning systems, Progol, 
ACE, 1BC, Prism and Weka, are described that include input and output file formats. 
 
2.1 Logical Foundation 
2.1.1 Concepts of Clausal Logic 
First of all, the logical notation employed throughout this report, is given in the following examples, 
which is based on [16]. 
 
Example 2.1.1. The information about publications, authors and citations, stores in the database. The 
sentence authorOf(lloyd, logic_for_learning)  ? for the relation authorOf/2 represents the fact that 
lloyd is the author of the publication  logic_for_learing . Similarly, if we want to represent that 
foundations_of_lp  is the bibliography of  logic_for_learing , we can use 
reference(logic_for_learning, foundations_of_lp) ?. [16] 
 
The whole database is shown below for Example 2.1.1: 
authorOf(russell, ai_a_modern_approach)  ? 
authorOf(quinlan, learning_logical_definitions_from _relatons)  ? 
authorOf(lloyd, logic_for_learning)  ? 
authorOf(lloyd, foundations_of_lp)  ? 
authorOf(muggleton, ilp_theory_and_methods)  ? 
authorOf(norvig, ai_a_modern_approach)  ? 
authorOf(deraedt, ilp_theory_and_methods)  ? 
reference(logic_for_learning, foundations_of_lp) ? 
reference(logic_for_learning, learning_logical_definitions_from _relatons) ? 
reference(logic_for_learning, ai_a_modern_approach) ? 
reference(ai_a_modern_approach, foundations_of_lp) ? 
reference(ai_a_modern_approach, ilp_theory_and_methods) ? 
reference(ilp_theory_and_methods, learning_logical_definitions_from _relatons) ? 
reference(ilp_theory_and_methods, foundations_of_lp) ? 
 
Even though the database just contains a small data, it still could be used to introduce some key concepts 
of knowledge representation formalism. In logic, a relation is called predicate p/n (authorOf/2) where p 
denotes the name of the predicate (authorOf) and n indicate the number of arguments the predicate has 
(2). Constants always start with lowercase character, which are a particular type of terms, such as lloyd, 
logic_for_learning. All data in the database in Example 2.1.1 are facts, which are represented by 
p(t1,???, tn) ?, where p/n is predicate and ti are terms. 
 
Example 2.1.2. The query ? authorOf(lloyd, logic_for_learing) asks whether lloyd is the author of 
logic_for_learing or not. A theorem prover, such as Progol (will be introduced in the next section), 
would return the answer yes, when it is true. Basically, the facts are true. [16] 
5 
 
 
When the arguments in the query start with an uppercase character, such as 
? authorOf(lloyd, Publication), the term Publication is called a variable. The theorem proves would 
return the answer yes and would also return the substitutions 
 {Publication/logic_for_learning} and {Publication/foundations_of_lp}  (the definition of 
substitutions explained later), which are true under the original query. 
 
Example 2.1.3.  If the query is required to find out whether there is an author who wrote the books of 
logic_for_learing  and foundations_of_lp  , we can use the query 
? authorOf(Author, logic_for_learing), authorOf(Author, foundations_of_lp). The single substitution 
is {Author/lloyd}. 
 
Therefore, the Ò,Ó between the two atoms in the query corresponds to and. The variable much be 
instantiated to the same constant in the substitutions. If we want to find the authors who cite one another, 
the following query can be used: 
? authorOf(A, P), reference(P, Q), authorOf(B, Q) 
Many answers would be generated for this query, like: 
{A/lloyd, P/logic_for_learning, Q/foundatoins_of_lp, B/lloyd} 
{A/lloyd, P/logic_for_learning, Q/ai_a_modern_approach, B/russell} 
 
Example 2.1.4. Instead of the query above, we can define a new predicate cites/2 for instead of the 
above query, like cites(A, B) ? authorOf(A, P), reference(P, Q), authorOf(B, Q). The clause indicates 
that A cites B if A is the authorOf P , P references Q, and B is the authorOf Q [16]. A theorem prover, 
such as Progol, these kinds of predicate are called rules. 
 
A term t is a constant lloyd, a variable Publication or a compound term  (t1 ,???, tn) composed of a 
function symbol f/n, f is the name, n is terms ti. For instance, logic_for_learning (constant), Publication 
(variable). [16] 
 
An atom is a formula of the form  (t1 ,???, tn), where p/n is the symbol, p is then predict, n is terms ti. 
For instance, authorOf(lloyd, foundations_of_lp), reference(P, foundations_of_lp). [16] 
 
A substitution? = {V1/t1 ,???, Vn/tn} is an assignment of terms t1 ,???, tn  to variables V1,???, Vn . The 
formula is F? , where F is a term, atom or clause (explain later). For instance, the formula 
authorOf(X, Y)?, where? = {X/ lloyd, Y/logic_for_learing}. 
 
Although terms and atoms have a similar syntax, the meanings of them are quite different. When 
looking at ground terms and atoms (ground means using only constant), it can be easy to distinct. 
Ground terms represent objects in the domain, whereas ground atoms represent a relationship between 
the objects, which is denoted by the terms. Therefore, ground terms do not possess truth-values, but 
ground atoms do. For instance, it does not make sense to have the truth-value of constant lloyd, or 
authorOf(lloyd). However, the ground atoms authorOf(lloyd, foundations_of_lp ) (for predicate 
authorOf/2) would be true. [16] 
 
6 
 
2.1.2 The Syntax of Clausal Logic 
Secondly, we will introduce the definition of clauses, which are the key constructs in clausal logic. 
 
Definition 2.1.5. A clause is an expression of the form h1;???; hn ? b1,???, bm where the hi and bj are 
logical atoms. [16] 
 
The symbol Ò,Ó stands for conjunction (and) and the symbol Ò;Ó for disjunction (or), and Ò?Ó for 
implication (if). h1;???; hn is referred to as the head of the clause, b1,???, bm as the body of the clause. 
Formally, a literal is either a logic atom b (a positive literal with atomic part A) or a negated atom  
b (a negative literal with atomic part A). Therefore, we can represent the clause in the Definition 2.1.5 as 
the set {h1,???, hn,  b1,???,  bm}. In addition, the set notation also can be written as a disjunction 
h1 ???  hn  b1 ???   bm. [16] 
 
We can set the n and m in different values to generate different types of clauses. There are now four 
special types: 
? Horn clauses, where n=1 or n=0; 
? denials, where n=0. 
? facts, where n=1 and m=0; 
? definite clauses, where n=1; 
 
The facts and definite clauses are most often employed in logical and relational learning. Horn clauses 
include facts and definite clauses. Denials represent negative information and be used as queries and 
goals [16], such as ? country(bristol) . Specifies that Bristol is not a country, the clause 
country(bristol) is false. Typically, the databases are consisted by a set of clauses. All of the clauses in 
the set are true. 
 
2.1.3 The Semantics of Clausal Logic 
Finally, the semantics of clausal logic can be introduced after the syntax of clausal logic has been 
defined. 
 
The semantics of clausal logic are based on the concept of an interpretation I and is usually restricted to 
the class of so-called Herbrand models, which are especially amenable to symbolic manipulation [17]. 
Interpretations are defined by using notion of domain. Herbrand interpretations is a special class of 
interpretation that will be focused on this report. Therefore, the Herbrand domain represents a set of all 
ground terms, which is constructed with constants and function symbol. A Herbrand interpretation then 
maps all ground terms to itself [16]. For a program   with language  , the Herbrand universe    is the 
set of all ground terms in  , and the Herbrand base B  is the set of all ground atoms in  . A Herbrand 
interpretation is an interpretation that is any subset of  B . An interpretation I satisfies an expression E if 
and only if: 
? E is a positive ground literal ÒaÓ such that a I 
? E is a negative ground literal Ònot aÓ such that a I 
? E is a ground rule R such that I satisfies a head atom of R or fails to satisfy at least one body literal of 
R. 
? E is a non-ground rule R such that I satisfies each ground instance of R 
7 
 
? E is a program P such that I satisfies every clause in P. 
 
Some theories have multiple models. There might be a model can be a subset of another model. If there 
is no subset of the Herbrand model, the model is minimal. The minimal modal is unique and is called the 
least Herbrand Model (LHM). [16] 
 
2.1.4 Logic Programming 
In the previous section, we have seen what clausal logic is and how the logic represents simple 
knowledge about a particular domain. Logic programming is a particular way to achieve programming, 
which is the use of logic as both a declarative and procedural representation language [12, 13]. In a 
purely declarative programming language, it would not involve in expressing procedural knowledge. 
Therefore, logic programming cannot ignore procedural programming. Prolog is not a purely declarative 
language, which is also involved procedural language [5]. Prolog is one of the first logic programming 
languages. 
 
Logic programming is based on the fact that a backwards reasoning theorem proves (as mentioned in 
2.1.1) applied to declarative sentences in the form of implications like: 
if A1 and ??? and An then  
The sentence means if A1  ???  An are true, then H becomes true, or false otherwise. If we use prolog to 
deal with the sentences above, the form of the language is: 
 :?A1,??? , An 
There are four types of clauses we have mentioned in 2.1.2 with expression of the form h1;???; hn ? b1,?
??, bm, which are Horn clauses, denials, facts and definite clauses. We now demonstrate each type clauses 
in prolog based on the Example 2.1.1: 
? Horn clauses, where n=1 or n=0: 
These two clauses would indicate rules (n=1) and query (n=0). Here, we discuss the Horn clauses 
where m   . 
For instance, cites(A, B) ? authorOf(A, P), reference(P, Q), authorOf(B, Q) is a rule, which can be 
represented by cites(A, B): ?authorOf(A, P), reference(P, Q), authorOf(B, Q). When n=0, the clause 
? authorOf(A, P), reference(P, Q), authorOf(B, Q) would be a query, which can also represented by 
??authorOf(A, P), reference(P, Q), authorOf(B, Q). 
? denials, where n=0: 
This is included by Horn clauses. Usually, denials represent negative information in the database. ?
?authorOf(russell, logic_for_learning). is the representation of a negative information, because the 
author of logic_for_learning is not Russell. 
? facts, where n=1 and m=0: 
For instance, authorOf(lloyd, logic_for_learning)  ? is a fact in the database, which can be 
represented by prolog as authorOf(lloyd, logic_for_learning). 
? definite clauses, where n=1: 
If m   , definite clauses are rules. If m =  , they are facts. 
Therefore, Progol can be used to represent any kind of clauses, and also can be used a declarative 
language. In the section 2.3, we can learn that the logic programming can be used in any ILP systems or 
workbench, such as Progol, Tilde, Warmr and Prism. All of the information can be read as prolog 
language. 
8 
 
2.2 Machine Learning Representations 
As introduced in the Chapter 1, there are five type representations for machine learning, BLL, AVL, 
MIL, MRL and ILP. In this project, there are only two machine Learning representations have been used 
in the workbench. Therefore, in the following 2 sections, only AVL and ILP are described. 
 
2.2.1 Attribute Value Learning 
AV representation is the most popular class of representation languages for data analysis so far and is 
employed in many academic and business areas. The reason why it is very popular is that the data can be 
represented in tabular form. It is very convenient to analyze or transfer data. 
 
Consider a playtennis example from [14] is shown in Table 1 (partial): 
 
Table 1 QuinlanÕs playtennis example 
Outlook Temperature Humidity Windy Class 
sunny hot high no negative 
sunny hot high yes negative 
overcast hot high no positive 
rain mild high no positive 
rain cool normal no positive 
rain cool normal yes negative 
overcast cool normal yes positive 
É É É É É 
 
AVL has a similar character with BLL. We just change the boolean value into attribute value. Such as 
class(positive) ? playtennis(overcast, Temperature,  umidity, Class). 
 
These two representations are essentially propositional, which are based on Boolean or propositional 
logic. Propositional representations cannot represent multiple entities as well as the relationships 
amongst them. Ryszard Michalski and Gordon Plotkin soon realized the limitations and started to utilize 
more expressive knowledge representation frameworks for learning. They focused on representing a 
variable number of entities using frameworks, which have relationships amongst them. Such 
representations are called relational. They are grounded in and derived from first-order logic, logical 
representations are found soon [16]. The targets of it are to learn problem involving multiple entities and 
the relationships amongst them. Then the rest of representations that are logic representations will be 
illustrated. 
 
2.2.2 Inductive Logic Programming 
ILP is the intersection of machine learning and logic programming. The examples, background 
knowledge and descriptions of ILP systems are all described within logic programs. The goal of the ILP 
is to find the hypothesis, which is covered all examples except negative examples, with background 
knowledge and concept description language. [18] 
 
This section has covered a fraction of prolog. Prolog is a powerful representation language. Now, there 
9 
 
is a more complex example shown below: 
 
Example 2.2.1. Consider the facts sort([1,3,4], [1,3,4]) ?, sort([3,5,4], [3,4,5]) ?  and 
sort([5,4], [4,5]) ?. When learning them as positive example from entailment setting [16]. The 
program below can cover all of these examples: 
 
insertsort(List, Sorted):-isort(List,[],Sorted). 
isort([], Acc, Acc). 
isort([H|T], Acc, Sorted):-insert(H,  Acc, NAcc),isort(T, NAcc, Sorted) 
 
insert(X,[],[X]). 
insert(X,[Y|T],[Y|NT]):-X>Y, insert(X,T,NT). 
insert(X,[Y|T],[X,Y|T]):-X=<Y. 
 
These prolog codes are based on [16]. As we can see from the codes, the positive examples are covered 
by the programs. The negative example would state a wrong output for the given input.  
 
Storing prolog into database, many researchers did a lot of work. However, there is still no suitable 
approach to store them. In this project, finding a way to store such programs is needed, one way can do 
it now is to store the whole program in one table with the name of the programÕs function. 
 
2.3 Learning Systems 
In the section, four famous systems of structured data will be demonstrated. We will focus on the input 
and output data format of each system. For studying these systems, further knowledge about how the 
different machine learning representations work can be learned.  
 
2.3.1 Progol 
Progol is a state-of-the-art ILP system, which was first described in [10]. Since then a number of 
advances have been made, the last system has been informed by feedback from experiments on a variety 
of real-world applications [11]. There is no graphical interface in the software, but the form of this 
progol is easy to be understood. Progol constructs logic programs from examples and background 
knowledge. In addition, examples are divided into positive examples and negative examples. All 
information is stored in a single file by the expanded-name ÔplÕ, which also include settings and mode 
declarations. In the project, expanded name always be used to indicate files, like .pl. 
 
Input file 
For instance, input file of animals can be given as following [11]: 
We just show a part of the data for saving space. 
Background knowledge of animals can be given as following: 
has_covering (dog, hair). 
has_legs (dog,4). 
has_milk (dog). 
Homeothermic (dog). 
10 
 
Habitat (dog, land). 
and positive examples can be given like: 
class (dog, mammal). 
class (trout, fish). 
class (eagle, bird). 
class (lizard, reptile). 
and then there are several negative examples given: 
:- class (penguin, mammal). 
:- class (dog, fish). 
:- class (penguin, reptile). 
:- class (dog, bird). 
Furthermore, the categories of objects, such as numbers, lists, names etc., should be described by types 
in the world under consideration.  
animal (dog). 
class(mammal). 
class(bird). 
covering(scales). 
covering(feathers). 
habitat(land). 
After that, the relations between objects of given types are described by modes. They can be used either 
in head (modeh) or body (modeb) of hypothesized clauses. For the head of a general rule, we might give 
the following head mode declarations 
:- modeh(1,class(+animal, #class))? 
The declaration states that head atom has predicate symbol class and has two variables of type animal 
and class as arguments. The Ô+Õ sign indicates that an argument is input variable. The Ô-Õ sign indicates 
output variable. And Ô#Õ sign indicates that a constant should be sited in the hypothesis. Therefore, the 
declaration above indicates 
Class(X, mammal). 
For atoms in the body, modeb can be declared as following: 
:- modeb(1,has_milk(+animal))? 
:- modeb(1,has_covering(+animal, #covering))? 
:- modeb(1,not has_milk(+animal))? 
:- modeb(*,habitat(+animal, #habitat))? 
The number in the modes is called the recall. This is used to bind the number of optional solutions for 
instantiating the atom. Ô1Õ means the predicate gives a unique answer (yes or no) when given suitable 
arguments. Ô*Õ indicates no limit to the number of instantiations, but progol will set its upper limit of 
100. 
 
Finally, we need describe some parameters as setting. For instance, 
set(c,4)? 
set(posonly)? 
The first declaration means the maximal length of clause. And another one indicates learn from positive 
examples only. 
 
11 
 
Output file 
The output file include final clauses and intermediate steps which enclosed with Ô[Õ and Ô]Õ. Moreover, 
there are four numbers which are preceded in each clause. These are, in turn, 
f = Number of positive examples covered - 
   Number of negative examples covered - 
   Number of literals in body of clause - 
   Optimistic estimate of literals needed; 
p = Number of positive examples covered; 
n = Number of negative examples covered; 
h = Optimistic estimate of literals needed. 
The progol will find the one of the most specific clause depends on the highest f with lowest n. Finally, 
at the bottom of the output file the final output are listed as: 
 class(snake, reptile). 
 class(A, mammal) :- has_milk(A). 
 class(A, fish) :- has_gills(A). 
 class(A, bird) :- has_covering(A, feathers). 
 class(A, reptile) :- has_covering(A, scales), has_legs(A,4). 
These are the final hypothesis. The progol codes and the output information are based on [11]. 
 
Progol has a simple way to collect data. However, many other ILP systems choose to use three to store 
different information separately. Aleph is another ILP system, which is much similar with progol, and 
also has three files. The study between them will help us to improve the converting between one file 
systems and three files systems. Studying Aleph will start at the beginning of the project. 
 
2.3.2 ACE (Tilde and Warmr) 
Tilde is one of the key algorithms in the ACE Dataming. There are three different file types in ACE 
system as input files, which are app.kb, app.bg and app.s where app is the name of the application [2]. 
The usage of each file shown below: 
? app.kb: this file contains the examples. Both training and test data are included in this file. 
? app.bg: this file contains the background knowledge, which is an optional file. 
? app.s: this file is a setting file, which include certain parameters of the algorithms. 
We also can see the Figure 2. It has two format of example, key format and model format, key format is 
much similar with progol. If we use model format, we have to set model for each submodels. 
Background knowledge is much similar with progol. However, in the setting file, Tilde and progol have 
a big different. 
 
In Tilde setting file, the refinement operator (hypothesis language) is using warmode as following form 
[2]: 
warmod(pred(tm1 , tm2 , É tmn) 
there is other form like: 
warmode(N: pred(tm1 , tm2 , É tmn) 
where, N is the times of literal can be added, and N is infinite by default [2]. The tmi  are type and mode 
declarations for variables. 
 
12 
 
 
Figure 2 ACE system 
 
At lower level, the refinement operator is using rmode predicate as: 
rmode(conj). 
It also has other form like: 
rmode(N: conj). 
where N is a natural number or infinite. conj means that the refinement step can consist of adding the 
conjunction of literals to the query. rmode also can contain some constant and symbols [6]. The setting 
file of Tilde input is quit complex. We do not  
 
The output files include Ô.outÕ and Ô.ptreeÕ and some other files. Ôbongard.ptreeÕ is shown here as a 
typical output of first-order decision-tree as Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3 Tilde output file - bongard.ptree 
From Figure 3, the decision tree is clearly built based on ÔtriangleÕ, ÔinÕ and ÔcircleÕ, which are required 
in the rmode, such as: 
mode(triangle(+-S)). 
rmode(square(+-S)). 
ACE 
Tilde É Warmr 
Example 
Knowledge 
base 
Domain 
Background 
knowledge 
Tast 
Language bias 
settings 
First-order 
Decision-tree 
Key 
Model 
format 
Bias 
Warmode 
rmode 
.kb .bg 
.s 
Output 
Input 
http://www.cs.bris.ac.uk/Teaching/Resources/COMSM0301/lsd-10-11-lecs67-ace.pdf 
13 
 
rmode(circle(+-S)). 
rmode(in(+S1,+-S2)). 
Tilde induces first-order logical decision tree (FOLDT) from data [3] and the input and output files have 
been introduced above. It will help us to gain general information about the characters of ACE Data 
mining for studying other systems. 
 
2.3.3 Prism 
Programming in Statistical Modeling (Prism) is a logic-based language like prolog, which integrates 
logic programming and probabilistic reasoning with parameter learning [19]. Both of the Prism and 
prolog execute programs in a top-down left-to-right manner. The input of the file is the rules and facts. 
When people visit prism, the terminal will be a control panel that uses can input what they want to 
predict of calculate the possibility of a set data. After that the result will be listed in the terminal such as 
the result in Progol. In addition, the Prism offers two other command, call upprism and mpprism. 
ÒupprismÓ is named as uni-process Prism which is used as a batch execution, that means there is no 
interactive execution when the prism run the data files. Moreover, if users want to run the upprism 
instead of prism, the query for the batch execution must be specified in the body of prism_name/0-1. 
ÒmpprismÓ is named as multi-process Prism which need to be set some additional settings for a parallel 
computing environment [19]. The output file would depends on what users want to predict or calculate. 
One of the result, which is used the example file in Prism software, is list in the Chapter 5. 
 
2.3.4 Weka 
Weka is the most popular workbench for AV learning as mentioned in the introduction. It provides a 
comprehensive collection of machine learning algorithms and data preprocessing tools [9]. Weka can be 
a previous work of my project. However, only data format of Weka is studied in this section. For 
example, a typical file is named Òweather.arffÓ can be seen in Figure 4. 
 
Figure 4 weather.arff 
Figure 4 shows that all ARFF format files can be converted into tables. The data can be easily managed 
by databases. ARFF is the data format of Weka. Any ARFF format file can be passed on the Weka. 
@relation weather 
@attribute outlook {sunny, 
overcast, rainy} 
@attribute temperature real 
@attribute humidity real 
@attribute windy {TRUE, FALSE} 
@attribute play {yes, no} 
@data 
sunny,85,85,FALSE,no 
sunny,80,90,TRUE,no 
overcast,83,86,FALSE,yes 
rainy,70,96,FALSE,yes 
rainy,68,80,FALSE,yes 
rainy,65,70,TRUE,no 
É 
out tem hum win class 
sun 85 85 F no 
sun 80 90 T no 
ove 83 86 F yes 
rain 70 96 F yes 
rain 68 80 F yes 
rain 65 70 T no 
É É É É É 
 
weather 
14 
 
Information in the ARFF file can be divided into three parts: declaring relation, declaring attribute and 
listing data. AVL can be shown in a single table. ÔRelationÕ is the name of the table. ÔAttributeÕ is the 
meaning of each column. ÔdataÕ store the whole values. 
 
This kind file format can be used in the workbench and allowed to use every function in the workbench, 
like regression, classification, clustering, association rule mining and attribute selection. However, some 
of the data attributes need to be amend slightly to suit specific algorithms. The output of Weka is 
comprehensive for AV learning. Different outputs are based on what parameters you set and what kind 
of data you analyze. 
 
2.3.5 1BC 
1BC is a first-order Bayesian Classifier. A Bayesian Classifier is simple probabilistic classifier that can 
be shown as: 
???????
?(?|?)?(?)
?(?)
     ??     ????????(?|?)?(?)                                 [8] 
However, the first-order rules not be used in the 1BC, it generate a set of first-order conditions instead of 
those rules, which are used classical attributes in a na•ve Bayesian classifier. It is seem like a 
propositionalization approach [8]. In the rest of the section, the input file and output file are introduced. 
 
Input File 
There are mainly two input files, call .prd and .fct, to store the hypotheses language in first one and store 
all ground facts only in another. For instance the eastwest.prd [6] file: 
 
--INDIVIDUAL 
train 1 train cwa 
--STRUCTURAL 
car 2 1:train *:car cwa li 
load 2 1:car 1:load cwa li 
--PROPERTIES 
class 2 train #class * cwa 
shape 2 car #shape 1 cwa 
length 2 car #length cwa 
wall 2 car #wall cwa 
roof 2 car #kind cwa 
wheels 2 car #nb_wheels cwa 
object 2 load #object cwa 
number 2 load #number cwa 
There are three parts in the file, Ò--INDIVIDUALÓ part as a molecule that can be a kind of objects. 
Ò--STRUCTURALÓ are used to refer to relate objects as setting new variables, Ò--PROPERTIESÓ define 
the predicts as consuming variables. Each line corresponds to one predicate that is defined by name, 
arity, type of arguments and whether the closed world assumption (cwa) is used for the predicate. It there 
is no cwa, the negative ground facts of that predict must be given in the .fct file. The line under the 
Ò--PROPERTIESÓ, Ò*Ó is inserted into, which mean the number of repetitions of the predicate in the 
hypothesis would be running. [6] 
15 
 
Output File 
The output file is call .res. The results are stored into this file. More information can be stored here if the 
other file called .sta is used with the verbose option Ğv is set. [6] 
 
2.4 Conclusion 
In this chapter, the logic foundation has been demonstrated firstly, which include clausal logic, logic 
programming. Then two machine learning representations are illustrated in details. Finally, five ILP and 
AV data mining system have been explained based on the input and output files. The knowledge is very 
important. The workbench in the project will integrate the five systems that are mainly used ILP and AV 
Learning. Learning the knowledge in this chapter is helpful to understand what these systems need (as 
input) and what kind results we will have (as output), which also can help us to make a general structure 
of how this workbench works? In the next Chapter, some famous previous works on the KD workbench 
are introduced. 
 
  
16 
 
3 PREVIOUS WORKS ON KD WORKBENCHES 
Some previous works on KD workbench and their limitations are described in this chapter, which 
involve Weka, ACE Datamining, Orange Data Mining, Oracle Data Mining and BET. These works are 
references of the project to create a new workbench for KD, which will inherit most advantages of these 
previous works, and avoid the limitations of them. 
 
3.1 WEKA 
Weka is one of the most famous workbenches for AV learning, which is a collection of state-of-the-art 
machine learning algorithms and data preprocessing tools. Weka can be used easily to access to the 
techniques in machine learning by researchers without becoming familiar with the technical details of 
the software and algorithms. Weka is enormously popular, because of its powerful, and is recognized as 
a landmark system in DM and machine learning [9].  
 
There are several advantages of having a workbench. Firstly, using workbench can unify the 
representation. One reason for Weka is powerful is the simplicity of its file format. Any AV data can be 
encoded in the ARFF file format, and then passed on any available functions, such as classifiers and 
clusters. Secondly, this workbench supplies a visual interface, which can provide an intuitive way to 
execute different functions of the workbench rather than using command line interface. Finally, Weka 
combines a lot of AV algorithms. Users just need to click the mouse, and amend the parameters, and then 
the result will be display in the panel. In this project, we will consider assembling as many algorithms as 
well for supporting a better workbench. 
 
Weka is powerful in AV learning, even in BL. However, a lot of machine learning problems are based on 
other kind representations, like RL and ILP. The most important weakness of Weka is that only AV data 
can be used in this workbench. The new workbench will be focus on integrating more algorithms for any 
kind of representations to fix the limitation of Weka in this area. 
 
3.2 ACE Data Mining 
ACE (A Combined Engine) Datamining is a relational datamining system developed at the Katholieke 
Universiteit Leuven, which bring several relational algorithms together, such as Tilde, Warmr, ICL, 
relational reinforcement learning, and some incremental learning systems. The data format in ACE is 
principally based on Prolog. This is a famous workbench for ILP. 
 
ACE is a data mining system that provides a command interface to a number of relational data mining 
algorithms. Relational data mining is the process of finding possible patterns in a relational database, 
which consist multiple tables [2]. Currently, ACE encompasses nine algorithms, which are Tilde [15], 
Warmr [1], ICL, RegRules, KBR, NLP, RIB3, TG and RRL [4]. These systems in the ACE are described 
in [2]. An advantage of the workbench is that it uses three files to contain three different data, examples, 
background knowledge and settings. The methods will be considered to use in the new workbench. In 
addition, this workbench has a number of relational data mining algorithms. We can use any machine 
learning representations in this workbench. 
17 
 
Nevertheless, as we known, ACE only has a command interface. Users need to learn the operation of 
command, which is not very easy to be used for beginners. Therefore, a better interface and an easier 
operation should be needed for analyzing relational data mining. In addition, ACE cannot connect 
database, users need to create datasets manually from their database, and then run the data with ACE. 
This is very inconvenient. The new workbench should have a function of connecting database and can 
converting the data into specific datasets automatically. 
 
3.3 Oracle Data Mining 
Oracle Data Mining (ODM) is a priced option to the Oracle Database 11g Enterprise Edition. The 
workbench runs directly in the oracle database. ODM has been design for fitting well with SQL 
language. It leaves data in its natural form instead of transposing and transactional form to a flat, and 
mines data directly. Such approach is simplicity and improved performance. 
 
ODM also has a friendly interface for users. However, when we consider analyzing some relational data 
mining, some data would be transacted or transposed. For example, there are several rules in the ILP. 
ODM cannot parse them and translate into database. The new workbench would have this ability. 
 
3.4 Orange Data Mining 
Orange is a component-based data mining and machine learning software suite, has a friendly interface 
and powerful visual programming front-end for explorative data analysis and visualization. It includes 
comprehensive set of components for data preprocessing, modeling and exploration techniques. It is 
maintained and developed at the Bioinformatics Laboratory of the Faculty of Computer and Information 
Science, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia. [20] 
 
There are five main features in orange data mining.  
? Visual programming 
? Visualization 
? Interaction and data analytics 
? Large toolbox 
? Scripting interface 
 
Orange data mining is good data mining software. Since there is limited time to study, it is hard to find a 
way to integrate this workbench in the project. 
 
3.5 BET System 
BET is implemented in Java an Object Oriented Language that is easy to extend. Many other 
applications can use the ILP systemÕs API and do not need to worry about the implementation details. 
They are developing a successful emulation for all the existing systems (FOIL, GOLEM, PROGOL, etc) 
and users can use interface to set the parameters of each system. By the integration of many different 
systems, users can easily compare the systemsÕ performs and find a better results. In addition, varied list 
of operators can search the search space. [18] 
18 
 
This workbench has the main idea of this project. We would also like to create such workbench for 
different ILP systems. Whereas, we will also consider integrate Weka or other AV learning and convert 
all representations into AV format. Moreover, database will be utilized in our workbench. In addition, 
BET is software for ILP systems. We do not think it is a convenient method for users to use. A new 
structure of the workbench will be attempted based on Brower/Server Structure. 
 
3.6 Conclusion 
From the studying of the previous works, the advantages and disadvantages are clearly shown. The new 
workbench should minimize the limitations and maximize the advantages of the existing works. One of 
the possible methods is using website to preprocess and run data, which have been accomplished in this 
project. In the next Chapter, the methodology of the project is discussed. 
 
  
19 
 
4 METHODOLOGY 
After studying the background and previous works on this field, the strong background knowledge is 
formed on what are the AV and ILP learning, how do the previous workbenches work? This chapter 
describes the developing language, needs analysis and workbench design based on the background 
knowledge. 
 
4.1 Developing Languages 
Lots of developing languages can be chosen to develop the workbench as a website. JSP is finally used 
in the project. Java is one of the post popular and powerful languages to develop J2EE and provide a 
wide and convenient interface with Linux system and WEKA. In addition, HTML is the main website 
developing languages with CSS and JavaScript. How good and friendly the workbench interface is 
depends on the manipulation of the HTML+CSS+JavaScript. Java is the main developing language that 
is used to convert data, calling the systems and display the information dynamically. Compare with other 
developing languages, Java has portability and security, and many open sources can be used to develop 
the workbench, like SmartUpload methods -- one of the most famous methods to upload, delete and 
download files. In this project, shell languages are also used to handle the batch for running the different 
systems. Partial of these codes are listed in the Appendix. 
 
4.2 Needs analysis 
Needs analysis is one of the most important processes when new software or workbenches will be 
developed. A good need analysis can directly affect the quality of the following developing parts. In 
general, the needs of the workbench are always changed. A very details analysis cannot be confirmed. 
There are, however, some essential parts of the workbench like Inputs, middle results and outputs need 
to be described. In the section, these three parts and files management are represented. 
 
4.2.1 Common File 
Creating a common file is one of the project aims. It is used to collection the information from different 
system data formats and also can sharing the data with the different systems. This file contains a new 
structure of data that any ILP learning systemsÕ file has not been used before. The detail design of the 
common file is explained in the section 4.3.1.  
 
4.2.2 Inputs 
Input files are required at the beginning of the operations in the workbench. However, no uploaded files 
are also allowed to come into the next operation control panel, since users can require a brand new data 
file to analyzing data like Figure 5 shown below. The diamond indicates the condition whether the new 
empty file should be created. The Middle results are described in the next section: 
20 
 
 
Figure 5 Input File Flow Chart 
 
4.2.3 Middle Result 
There are several middle results involved when the users in the amending Pages as Figure 6 shown. A 
common file will be converted from the uploaded file(s). A number of other systemsÕ files will then be 
converted from common file. At the same time, some of results are created by calling their systems, like 
Progol and ACE for giving a prompts to users to help them amend the data efficiently, the other systems 
are also provided some prompts by the workbench based on their minimum requirements. After user 
update their data file, a new loop from converting common file to generating the systemsÕ files starts 
again.  
 
 
Figure 6 Middle Result Flow Chart 
 
4.2.4 Outputs 
There are three types of files need to be shown at the end of the workbench, which are the results, 
amended file and common file, as Figure 7 shown. These outputs need to be displayed in the Result 
Page, downloading files is required. Furthermore, as mentioned in Chapter 2, the results of ACE are 
store in the different files. If ACE cannot be run correctly, there is no results file that can be generated. 
Therefore, the outputs of the ACE has to be considered showing the suitable one based on which output 
can show more useful information to users. 
 
Home Page No uploaded? Middle results 
Create new empty files 
Yes 
No Amending 
Page 
Common 
file 
Uploaded 
file(s) 
Conversion 
algorithms 
Progol 
ACE 
1BC 
Prism 
WEKA 
Amending Page 
Calling 
systems 
Minimum 
Requirement 
Update 
21 
 
 
Figure 7 Output Files Flow Chart 
 
4.2.5 Files Management 
Five systems have been integrated in the workbench, good organization of filesÕ directory is helpful to 
expand and maintain the workbench. In this project, entirely separate file system management is used to 
manage the files instead of storing the relative files into the same subdirectory. For example, there are 
three subdirectories that are used to store progol, called ÒprogolÓ, ÒtempprogolÓ and ÒresultprogolÓ. The 
ÒprogolÓ directory is used to store the final progol file which is converted from common file. The 
ÒtempprogolÓ directory is used to store the semi-manufactured progol file, which is still need to be clean 
up. The results of progol will store into the ÒresultprogolÓ directory. This approach might create more 
files when users operate the workbench. However, the needed time is acceptable. In addition, that could 
bring lots convenience for developing the workbench. 
 
4.3 Workbench Design 
Some of the flow charts have been described in section 4.2 for clearly explaining the requirements. In 
this section, common file format and the main flow chart of the workbench are illustrated. The figures 
used in 4.2 are needed here instead of the duplication of works. 
 
4.3.1 Common File Format 
Creating new data format is the core of this project. The data format would allow us to analyze the data 
with different algorithms. There are two available approaches to achieve this. One is Common Data 
Format (CDF); another one is Converting Data between Different Algorithms (CDDA), which are 
mentioned in the interim report. The CDF finally have been used in this project as shown in Figure 8: 
 
Results 
Amended file 
Amending Page Result Page 
Calling the 
system that 
users have 
chosen to 
run the data 
Common file 
Download 
files 
22 
 
 
Figure 8 CDF 
 
Based on the knowledge in section 2.3, a general character can be found for these ILP systemsÕ learning. 
All of them have four main parts, which are settings, positive examples, negative examples, and 
background knowledge. In the setting part, it is always divided into mode declarations and settings. 
Therefore, as default, in any ILP system there are five elements, which are settings, mode declarations, 
positive and negative example and background knowledge. Some of the ILP systems just have two or 
three elements, but on one contains the element that is not included in the five. 
 
As the train example shown in Chapter 2, when we want to know which way the trains more likely to go? 
Some positive and negative examples and background knowledge should be needed firstly. Some 
particular mode declarations and settings should be set for prediction. This is prevalent method of realize 
the datasets. Therefore, in the common file, abstracting the information separately is a possible approach 
to accomplish the aim. However, the common cannot just store the data based on the different parts. It 
should have their own structure to store the data to realize the data sharing between the different data 
formats. Actually, the positive examples and background knowledge can be shared between different 
systems directly. The part that can be shared directly need to be sorted and parsed before they can be 
stored in the common file. 
 
In the interim report, we supposed that the common file(s) can have more than one files like ACE and 
1BC. The settings and mode declarations can be stored and shared in one file, the facts and rules in 
another file. However, for convenient, the final common file have been created in a single file. The 
method used here to distinguish the data is to input a start symbol in front of each sentence such as: 
from(?????????): ? 
This sentence looks like a head of a rule. The idea of the structure is from the prolog language. Even 
though Java is used here to parse the data, prolog actually can do that faster than Java does. This 
structure allows people to make an extension or improvement on common file with prolog language. In 
addition, this method is successful used in the workbench for storing data. Furthermore, having a good 
start of a sentence is not enough. To realize the data sharing, the rest of the sentence must be powerful. 
There is a list as following, which are the mode declarations in Progol, ACE and 1BC settings file: 
1BC Progol 
CDF 
ACE 
Prism WEKA 
23 
 
: ?modeb(1, class(+train, #direction))? 
warmode(1: class(+train, ?direction)). 
class 2 train #class 1 cwa 
The meanings of each sentence have been explained in Chapter 2. Here, they all predict one thing Ğ 
which directions the trains are going to leave? The first two lines are head mode declarations. In 1BC, 
different structures of the predictions are used. However, we can clearly see the similar part from the 
three sentences. Therefore, the following sentences have been created for store all these information: 
 
? from(Progol):-body_name(modeb),body_int(1),not(no),arity($),body_predict(class),body_predict_n
ame(+train,#direction),repetition($),cwa($). 
? from(ACE):-body_name(warmode),body_int(1),not(no),arity($),body_predict(class),body_predict_
name(+train,#direction),repetition($),cwa($). 
? from(PROPERTIES):-body_name($),body_int($),not(no),arity(2),body_predict(class),body_predict
_name(train,#class),repetition(1),cwa(yes). 
 
As we can see, the three sentences have same structure. When we have any one sentence, the other two 
can be generated automatically by workbench. The process of the sentence conversion is illustrated in 
Chapter 5. The setting part (indicates the parameters in the systems) cannot be shared, because the type 
of algorithms is different, the meaning of the settings are also different. However, the rest data in the ILP 
learning can be shared by each other. For example: 
 
? from(Progol):-rule{number_of_cars(T,N):- train(T), findall (M, has_car(T,M),Ms), length(Ms, N), 
integer (N). }. 
? from(Progol):-fact{class(east1,eastbound).}. 
? from(Progol):-negative{:-class(west5,eastbound).}. 
? from(BC):-fact{class(t2,eastbound).}. 
? from(ACE):-fact{begin(model(02)).} 
? from(ACE):-fact{class(east1,eastbound).}. 
? from(Dat):-fact{phenotype(ab).}. 
 
These data can be used by any ILP system, except some specific clause, like from(ACE):-fact{begin 
(model(02)).} is only used by ACE Model Format. Alternatively, this sentence can be stored with other 
name instead of fact. In this project, the above styles have been used in common file. They are easy to 
realize all the functions in the workbench. Furthermore, Weka is also integrated in this workbench. The 
common style of the data is like: 
from(Weka):-weka_name(eastwest). 
from(Weka):-weka_attribute(short),attribute_value({yes, no}). 
from(Weka):-weka_data_start(@data). 
from(Weka):-weka_data(yes,eastbound). 
 
From this example, we can consider that the common can be extended for any other systemsÕ file 
formats with just a separate parameter and name as Òfrom(Parameter):-name(value).Ó, and store the data 
which can be shared into the shared part of the common file. 
 
24 
 
4.3.2 Main Flow Chart of Workbench 
 
Figure 9 Main Flow Chart of Workbench 
Figure 9 shows the main flow chart of this workbench, which is used Browser/Server (B/S) structure. 
The users can use browser to interview the workbench. The blue dashed box means the java methods are 
required, the blue solid box in Client part indicate the web pages, and shows the types of files in server 
part. The dashed line means the users could only visit the three web pages like they are connected. The 
solid line, however, shows the real path that the data followed. 
 
First of all, the Home Page is displayed, the files uploaded by users is stored in the ÒUploaded filesÓ 
through the Upload methods. Secondly, the server will convert the data into common file and then 
convert the data into all of the systems. Thirdly, these data will be displayed in the Amending Page. At 
the same time, Call Systems methods are used to calculate the ACE and Progol results. Then the error 
results will be displayed as prompts. The rest systems need the input from users. Therefore, the prompts 
about error or warning prompts will be found by the Check methods. Fourthly, users can update their 
data, and then the same flow from second will be run again. Fifthly, when users have finish update data, 
they can choose an algorithm to see the result. At this time, the particular Call systems methods will be 
run, and send the outputs to the Result Page that include result, amended file and the common file as 
shown in thick line. Finally, users can download any files using download function. If there are several 
Home Page 
Converting data 
Page 
Amending Page 
Uploaded files 
Download data 
Result Page 
Call systems 
Common file 
ACE 1BC Prism Progol WEKA 
Upload 
Update data 
Server Client 
Output 
Check 
Shell 
25 
 
results, a shell will be employed to compress these files in one .zip file. 
 
4.3.3 Upload and Download File Flow Chart 
 
Figure 10 Upload and Download File Flow Chart 
Figure 10 shows the details of upload and download in the workbench. SmartUpload methods are used 
here to upload and download files. (SmartUpload is an open free code). The explanation has been made 
in the 4.3.2. 
 
4.3.4 Converting Data Flow Chart 
 
 
Figure 11 Converting Data Flow Chart 
Figure 11 shows the process of converting data. After users upload files, ÒtraninÓ method convert the 
files into common file, and the data that are converted must satisfied the ÒBrackets CheckÓ and ÒPattern 
MatchingÓ. It is same when the common file transout into the five systemsÕ files. 
 
4.3.5 Summary 
There some more flow charts involved, three of them have been illustrated in the section 4.2 for 
explaining Needs Analysis clearly. Some of the flow chart is not very important for the workbench, 
Upload 
SmartUpload 
Download 
Shell 
.zip 
Single File? 
Yes No 
Upload Files 
MiddleResult 
Results 
Download 
Start Preprocess Transin 
Transout 
Brackets Check 
Pattern Matching 
Common file 
SystemsÕ Files End 
26 
 
which have not been listed here. These flow charts are used to developed the workbench, and make the 
developing process easier than without these charts. 
 
4.4 Test Plans 
If the process of development nearly finished, evaluation is a necessary part in the software development. 
If the workbench is successful and powerful, a huge number of data need to be tested through this 
workbench without any exception. Otherwise, the workbench cannot afford strange data which it never 
been considered. Therefore, the workbench needs to test as much data as possible. This data could from 
each system examples, and also can use data that created by people. In addition, the data that not 
belongs to the ILP and AV are also used to test the workbench to make the workbench stronger. 
 
4.5 Conclusion 
In this chapter, the developing languages have been discussed. Html, Css, JavaScript, Java and Shell are 
used together to developed the workbench. Needs analysis have been analyzed in common file, input, 
middle result, output and files management. Then the main workbench flow chart is created for 
developing the workbench. Finally, the test plans have been made for testing the workbench. All of these 
works are necessary in the process of developing software. In the next Chapter, the result is listed and 
explained in details. 
 
  
27 
 
5 RESULTS 
This Chapter details the results of running the workbench. At the beginning, the environment of the 
workbench is described first. Following that, the final common file is explained by details. In the rest of 
this chapter, both interface and background of the workbench is illustrated. 
 
5.1 Environment 
CentOS5.6 has been used as Linux Operating System. Root user is chose to login in the project. 
Myeclipse9 is the development software to develop the workbench. Java environment is the last version 
of jdk which is JDK1.7.0 and JAVA_HOME, PATH and CLASSPATH are set in /etc/profile file. 
Apache-Tomcat7.0.19 is used as web server that can resolve Java codes. The whole path of the 
Apache-Tomcat7.0.19 is /usr directory. The systems Progol4.4, 1BCs, ACE-ilProlog-1.2.20, Prism1.12.1 
and WEKA3.6.4 are installed into /root directory. WEKA do can install in any directory, because 
weka.jar is the only one used in the project for calling the weka algorithms which is needed to add in 
Referenced Libraries. Weka.jar allow the workbench to employ weka. Shell stores shells program. They 
are used to call linux terminal to run the particular system. They also need to be stored in /root directory 
with the execute permission. The file paths above must be satisfied. Otherwise, the workbench cannot 
run successfully. When the environment has already been set, the workbench could be run. In the 
practice, the workbench has been tested through IE9, Firefox 6.0.2 in Windows and Firefox 3.6.18 in 
Linux. 
 
5.2 Common File 
In section 4.2.1, the main structure of any file format can be divided into five parts, which includes 
settings, hypothesis, background knowledge, positive examples and negative examples. Therefore, the 
common file has been considered to store the data based on these parts. This section explains the style of 
the common file that is created by each file format. 
 
5.2.1 Progol to CF 
 
Figure 12 Progol Clauses 
Figure 12 shows a progol file which is the example of east west train. Even though just small part of the 
whole data, it still contain all elements that progol file could have. Five colours are used here as signs. 
28 
 
Orange indicates settings, yellow denotes predicates, blue expresses rules (include integrity constraints), 
purple shows the facts, and negative examples are marked by green, finally, the gray lists error sentences. 
In the rest of the section, all examples use the same colour to indicate the data. 
 
The following Figure 13 shows the common file that is converted by Progol file format. 
 
 
Figure 13 Common Format for Progol 
 
From the two figures above, we could see the conversion from Progol to CF. The common file use the 
form Òfrom (Progol): -Ó as the start of each sentence. Then the remaining sentence stores the real data 
from the Progol. The first four lines are settings in Progol. Keeping these data here is for make 100 
present accuracy when it is converted back to Progol. The fifth and sixth lines show the mode 
declarations. This part can be shared with ACE and 1BC. Hence, the information is divided into several 
parts. The detail explanation is in 5.2.6. The following lines show the integrity, rule, fact, negative and 
other. All of them can be shared by other systems except WEKA. Braces are used to store all sentences 
from Progol. 
 
5.2.2 ACE to CF 
Figure 14 shows an ACE file, which is integrated from .s, .kb and .bg file. If the data do not belong to 
yellow, blue and purple parts, the workbench would store them into orange part. In fact, it works well. 
No setting can be shared between the different systems, because they employ the different algorithms 
based on different structures. 
 
 
Figure 14 ACE Clauses 
 
29 
 
The following Figure 15 shows the common file that is converted by ACE file format. 
 
 
Figure 15 Common Format for ACE 
This common file is much similar with the last section. The only different part is in the start of the 
sentence -- Òfrom (ACE): -Ó. The rest have same meanings as Progol. 
 
5.2.3 1BC to CF 
Figure 16 shows a 1BC file that include both .prd and .fct file. The orange part is the definition of the 
Properties as settings in 1BC. In Chapter 2, more fundamental knowledge has already been listed. 
 
 
Figure 16 1BC Clauses 
The following Figure 17 shows the common file that is converted by 1BC file format. 
 
 
Figure 17 Common Format for 1BC 
There are three forms start of the sentences used to indicate different parts in 1BC. However, only the 
PROPERTIES with the body part and the facts except Ò!Ó can be shared by other systems. 
 
5.2.4 Prism to CF 
Figure 18 shows a Prism file. This could be from the .psm file or might be from .psm and .dat files. The 
30 
 
structure of Prism is very simple. Just rules and facts are involved. 
 
Figure 18 Prism Clauses 
 
The methods used here are also very simple. Storing any data from .psm file as rule, and the data 
from .dat file as facts as Figuer 19. 
 
 
Figure 19 Common Format for Prism 
 
5.2.5 WEKA to CF 
Figure 20 shows the weka file, which include relation, attributes and data. This is discussed in Chapter 2. 
 
 
Figure 20 WEKA Data 
 
Compare the Figure 20above, the information from Figure 21 would be easy to understand based on the 
last sections. Weka is an AV Learning system as discussed in Chapter 3. To be considered in the 
workbench is to show the common file is powerful (explanation in 5.2.7).  
 
 
Figure 21 Common Format for WEKA 
 
5.2.6 CF to others 
First of all, the common file could convert back to its original file correctly based on the start words of 
31 
 
each sentence. Secondly, sharing data between different systems is also available. The following figure 
indicates the method have been used in this project to convert the ACE predicts and 1BC properties to 
Progol mode declarations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 22 CF to Progol 
 
From the Figure 22, it is clearly shown how common file share the data. In addition, the conversions are 
done by the workbench, there are always have some illegal programming for the particular systems. 
Therefore, some manual works are necessary. 
 
5.2.7 Summary 
The common file currently is satisfied to the workbench for the five systems. It is also a powerful 
common file. More systems in the workbench, more powerful the common file has. That is the reason 
why weka is integrated in this workbench. The arff file cannot share its data with other ILP Learning 
systems without using propositionalization (or some similar conversion algorithms), but it has not been 
affected to join into the common file. New style of the start of the sentence and some suitable 
predication could help any data format to be converted into common file and be converted from 
common file. 
 
5.3 Interface of Workbench 
The interface of the workbench involves nine pages, which are Home Page, Amending Page, Result 
Page, Error Page, Introduce Page and Help Page, Contact Page. Only the first three pages are used for 
analyzing data. In this section, the first three pages and some functions will be explained in detail. 
 
5.3.1 Home Page 
The home page is the first interface of the workbench as Figure 23 shown. The first page has shown data 
preparing in control penal and some introduction about the workbench in the side penal. As Figure 23 
shown, users could upload their files in the control penal, and then the file list will be listed in the 
following subpanel. After finishing uploading files, users should choose one of the systems Progol, 
WEKA, 1BC, ACE and Prism. Progol is the default choice. The common file also is listed in the panel 
that helps users to go to common file page directly. It is also allowed users use this workbench without 
upload any files. The workbench will create empty files for users. Finally, when the first step has been 
finish, users can click Next to go to the amending page. 
 
32 
 
 
Figure 23 Home Page 
5.3.2 Amending Page 
Figure 24 shows the amending page in Progol part, the rest of the systems are demonstrated in section 
5.5. As you can see in this figure, there are two main panels, which are updating panel and prompts 
panel. Users could use the information from prompts to amend their uploaded files (Progol just has one 
data file). From prompts panel, users could see the warnings, errors, integrity constraint, settings, mode 
declarations, rules, positive examples, and negative examples. All of them are counted in the subtab of 
each prompt. 
Side panel 
Algorithms 
File List 
Top Tab 
Go to next step 
Control panel 
Uploading 
33 
 
 
 
Figure 24 Amending Page 
 
5.3.3 Result Page 
Figure 25 shows the result page which contains three parts, the results, the amended original files and 
the common file. Users can read them through this page, and also can download them.  
 
5.3.4 Summary 
There are totally three steps in this workbench. Some useful prompts are provided when users amend 
their data. These characters of the workbench are definitely helpful to make a successful analysis of data 
for users who do not have depth background knowledge in such fields. These three pages have covered 
all of the process of analyzing data. However, the background of the workbench takes more 
responsibility for the workbench, which is described in the next section. 
 
 
Updating panel 
Prompts panel 
34 
 
 
Figure 25 Result Page 
5.4 Background of Workbench 
In the background of the workbench, all Java methods are utilized by the workbench for supporting 
conversion data and file management. It also involve a number of pages, all of them are used to handle 
the conversion of the data, running the algorithms and the management of the files. 
 
5.4.1 Converting Data 
As mentioned in the Chapter 4 and described in section 5.2, converting data is the core of the workbench, 
because all of the uploaded file will be convert into common file firstly. The data can be seen in the 
amending page is converted from common file. When users update their amended data, the common file 
would be generated automatically, then converted into another system file format except the one that 
users amended. There are two java methods, called transin and transout, to take charge the conversion of 
the workbench. Transin methods control the input data. Because of the diversity of the data format, 
particular methods have been made for each system file format as shown in Figure 26.  
 
35 
 
 
Figure 26 Converting Data into Common File 
 
Figure 26 clearly shows how the uploaded files convert into common file. Methods in the red box means 
the preliminary preprocessing, which include delete all annotation, input full stop at the end of the 
sentence (there is no full stop symbol like Ò.Ó, Ò?Ó) and input enter after full stop (this methods could 
make each whole sentence only be store in one line). Some of the system file formats do not need Input 
Full Stop or Input Enter after Full Stop. After the preprocessing, two more methods are used to choose 
correct data to convert into common file as a filter. Full Pattern Matching is used here to choose suitable 
data that can avoid Array Index out Of Bounds Exception when the workbench converts data. Any 
unsatisfied data will be store as Òfrom (InputFileType):-other {content}.Ó For example, the following 
pattern matching could match all correct head mode declaration for Progol: 
Ò^\\s*:-\\s*modeh\\b\\s*\\(\\s*([\\-0-9\\*]*\\s*\\,)+\\s*(not)*\\s*[_a-z]+\\s*\\
(\\s*[\\s\\+\\#\\-\\(\\)\\[\\]\\|\\=_a-zA-Z0-9]+\\s*(\\,\\s*[\\s\\#\\+\\-\\(\\)\\[\\]\\|\\
=_a-zA-Z0-9]*)*\\s*\\)\\s*\\)\\s*\\?\\s*$Ó 
All the other pattern functions are used same approach. 
 
On the other hand, when the common file converts into the systemsÕ files, the exactly same approaches 
are used for each particular systemÕs files. However, no preliminary preprocessing (red boxes in Figure 
26) is used here. Partial of the codes of transin and transout methods are listed in the appendix.  
Uploaded file(s) 
Transin for common 
Transin for WEKA 
Transin for Prism 
Transin for 1BC 
Transin for ACE 
Transin for Progol 
Common file 
Delete Annotation 
Input Full Stop 
Brackets Check 
Input Enter after Full Stop 
Pattern Matching 
36 
 
5.4.2 Calling Systems 
The workbench has integrated Progol, ACE, 1BC, Prism and WEKA all together instead of creating such 
data mining systems. Therefore, the workbench has the responsibility for calling these systems to 
calculate the results. For Progol, Linux command is required for calling the system, and then the result 
would be displayed in the Terminal. Thereby, ÒRuntime.getRuntime().exec(command);Ó (java codes) has 
been used here for connecting Linux Terminal. Finally, using input and output stream store the results 
into the file. In addition, the command must include the path of the Progol directory. For ACE, Linux 
command is also required. However, when the usersÕ data include some errors, the terminal would be 
stuck for waiting the standard input. There is no result if the same methods used as Progol. Therefore, a 
new Java method has been used here, called ProcessBuilder, to accomplish our requirement without any 
stuck. For 1BC, the requirements are similar with the above systems, but it is always needed input 
arguments to run the system. Using the same methods as Progol can handle it. For Prism, as mentioned 
in Chapter 2, it is required input command to run Prism. Nevertheless, Prism has not provided an 
interface for Java. Fortunately, Prism has an upprism command that can run the prism without any 
interactive execution [19]. We just need to add a clause body of prism_main0/1 into the first of the .psm 
file for a batch execution and then use the same methods as Progol. For WEKA, because it is a free open 
system that is developed by Java, the workbench just put the weka.jar in the References Libraries for 
call the algorithms in WEKA. 
 
All of the system can be run through the workbench. However, one more difficulty has been encountered. 
When the users update their data through website, the <textarea> tabs (HTML) will store an invisible 
enter symbol in the file. The systems cannot deal with such files. Therefore, dos2unix command is 
required to delete such symbol. For convinent, all the ILP Learning systems need a couple of commands. 
Shell is used here for combine these command, then just calling the shell to deal with the data is the best 
way to calculate the results. The partial shell codes have been listed in the Appendix. 
 
5.4.3 Summary 
The background of the workbench can be seen by the users, but they provide an irreplaceable important 
role of the workbench. Whether the workbench is successful, the background holds more than 50 present. 
The interface of the workbench only can show the information of the data, but the background offer the 
most of the calculation for the workbench. After the conversion and calling systems work well, the main 
systemsÕ results will be illustrated in the following section. 
 
5.5 Each System Results 
In this section, the results of each system will be explained. Because of the involved pictures are big, 
some interface will just explain once by one of the systems in the workbench. In addition, the result 
from each system is not explained in this project, because the project is focus on the workbench function. 
The following Figure 27 is the tab of the workbench. User could choose them to run the first five 
systems. The last tab indicates the common file data and the information that is included in common file.  
 
Figure 27 Top Tags 
 
37 
 
 
5.5.1 Progol Results 
 
The Results of Progol part has been displayed in section 5.3 as an example of interface of the workbench. 
Figure 28 indicates that the original file is displayed in the Result Page, and users can download the file. 
 
 
Figure 28 Progol Result 
 
 
5.5.2 ACE Results 
 
In ACE part, as we can see in Figure 29, the uploaded files are displayed separately in the left of the 
workbench (data from ACE examples Bongard). Users can update the data and click Update to save the 
amended files. In the right of the workbench, there are some similar prompts with Progol, which include 
the number of warnings, errors, parameters, mode declarations, rules and examples. In the parameters 
part, there are 26 parameters have been set, which are shown in the left of this part. The other side shows 
the default parameters in ACE. Users can find the parameters they want to used or check the default 
value use this part. 
 
38 
 
 
Figure 29 Amending Page for ACE 
 
 
At the bottom of the amending page, there 
are two algorithms that can be chosen by 
user to run Tilde and Warmr in ACE system.  
 
The following Figure 30 shows the rest of 
the prompts that are hidden in the Figure 29. 
The mode declarations part shows the 
declarations that users have already set in the 
left, and the other side shows the optional 
declarations in the data files. This prompts is 
same as Progol system. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                    Figure 30 ACE Prompts 
 
 
39 
 
 
The following Figure 31 shows the result of Bongard by running Tilde. 
 
 
Figure 31 Result of ACE (Tilde) 
 
 
 
5.5.3 1BC Results 
 
Figure 32 shows the 1BC Amending Page, the uploaded data from 1BC example -- eastwest. The edit 
part is similar with Progol and ACE. However, the prompts part have some differents. As we can see the 
bottom of the figure, 1BC need users set the parameters to run the system. Setting parameters part give 
the two optional algorithms that 1BC and 1BC2, and then users need to choose one of the stems that is 
listed predicts in the .prd file. Finally, users choose the number of literals and the number variables. 
40 
 
 
Figure 32 Amending Page for 1BC 
 
On the other tabs in the bottom prompts 
which is shown in Figure 33, the workbench 
provides command line for users who can 
use commands. The files name has been 
changed during data conversion. Therefore, 
the final part of the command which is the 
name of the file can be ignore in the 
command line, even the users use their 
original file name it also can go through the 
workbench, because the name of the file will 
be ignore. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                   Figure 33 1BC Prompts 
41 
 
After given the command line above or set parameters in the first tab, the result can be given as 
following Figure 34. 
 
Figure 34 Result of 1BC 
5.5.4 WEKA Results 
Weka includes a lot of algorithms for AV data mining. The workbench now just import J48 into the 
classify parts. The example used here is the weather.arff in weka data file. There is no preprocessing for 
the change of data. Nevertheless, we also can update the data by hand as shown in Figure 35: 
 
Figure 35 Amending Page for WEKA 
After clicking Start, the following result Figure 36 is given. 
 
Figure 36 Result of WEKA J48 
 
5.5.5 Prism Results 
Figure 37 shows the Prism amending page. The left of the workbench and the top two tags are similar 
with the ACE. Here only the bottom tab on the right is needed to be explained. In this workbench, Prism 
can be run by ÒupprismÓ command, because it does not need interactive execution. Users need add the 
42 
 
prism_main0/1 in the upprism tab. It is all the same when people use prism in the terminal. The figure 
38 shows the result of the prism after we put: 
prism_main([]):-hmm_learn(100),show_sw. 
in the upprism part. 
 
Figure 37 Amending Page for Prism 
 
Figure 38 Result of Prism 
43 
 
5.5.6 Common Results 
Figure 39 shows the common amending page. The example used here is same as Progol. The common 
file also has two parts, updating and prompts. In the prompts part, the information about Progol, 1BC 
and ACE are listed in this part, and also the rules and examples (as facts), which can be consult by Prism 
users. At the right bottom of page, there are four acceptable systems which can be run by the data in the 
common file is listed. Users can choose one of the following (highlighted below) to run the system 
directly. The result page would be one of the result pages above. 
 
Figure 39 Amending Page for Common File 
 
5.5.7 Summary 
As we can see in the section 5.5, the workbench can successfully run all of the five systems and the 
prompts can provide the correct information to users. In addition, all of the functions can be run 
successfully like Update, Back, Next, Start and Save. In the next Chapter, the main conclusions are 
given. 
 
  
44 
 
6 CONCLUSIONS 
This chapter discusses the result. Whether the workbench satisfied the initial design requirement or not? 
Comparing with other workbenches, which advantaged and disadvantages it has? Finally, reviewing the 
aims and objectives of the project to judge whether the workbench has been accomplished and if so how 
successfully it is. 
 
6.1 Common File Format 
The current common file format allows interoperability of the different systems and their proprietary file 
formats as the example used in section 5.2. The common file is the center of the workbench. Most of the 
methods are used to deal with the different data formats as described in section 5.4.1. From the results 
part, all systems can work successfully that indicate the common file have done well.  
 
6.2 Structure of the Workbench 
The workbench used JSP to develop as a website. Any people can use this workbench through the 
Internet. It is absolutely one of the most convenient data mining workbenches. Users can use five 
systems to analyze data at one time without install any one systems. The workbench could automatically 
help users converting their data into other data formats and show the prompt when the users amend data. 
Users do not need strong background knowledge of this area to use the workbench. 
 
6.3 Evaluation 
Based on the aims and objectives of the projects, the following part is considered to evaluate, which 
includes the whole workbench, the common file and the exceptions.  
 
6.3.1 Web Standard Workbench 
The first aim of the project is to develop a KD workbench for structured data which integrate Progol, 
ACE, 1BC, Prism and Weka systems. This was completed with the JSP, Oracle and those systems. 
Therefore, this aim can be considered a success as it met the requirement of using the workbench and 
returning the specific results.  
 
6.3.2 Converting Data File 
The second aim of the project is to create a common file that can store all the information from the 
different file formats and also can convert data from the common file to each other file formats. The 
common file also can assort the data. If the meanings of the data are similar or same, it will be stored in 
one single sentence and also can convert to these file formats that need the sentence. This is also 
accomplished with Java. If the upload data is intact, the common file could store all the information 
without any exception. In addition, when the common file is generated, the common file also can 
confirm some type of illegal data. However, not all of the data can be converted correctly. It will trigger 
the exception when the workbench receives the illegal data that have not been considered. 
 
 
45 
 
6.3.3 Exception 
The number of the exception happened during the test of the workbench is one of the most important 
criterion of evaluation. When the error encountered, the web.XML of the workbench could rout up the 
following error page as Figure 40 instead of the 404 or 500 error pages. 
 
 
Figure 40 Exception Page 
 
Hitherto, no exception encountered based on the powerful test file. However, it cannot be guaranteed to 
all the cases.  
 
  
46 
 
7 FUTURE WORKS 
This project is actually a huge project and each part of the workbench has lots of knowledge that are 
needed to be studied. This chapter lists the future works which are not achieved at recently. 
 
7.1 Extension of the Workbench 
The extension of workbench has two parts. One is based on the self of workbench, another is the 
common file. 
 
7.1.1 Workbench 
In recent years, lots of data mining systems have been developed for meeting the increasing demands of 
people, like Oracle data mining system, Orange data mining system. They are all very good KD 
workbench. If a KD workbench is most powerful, the workbench must have the most algorithms can be 
run, the most convenient operations need to be used, the fastest can find out the results and the most 
accurate on the results. From this point, the project has really lots works, like increase the speed and the 
accuracy of transfer data, integrate more data mining systems and improve the common file. 
 
7.1.2 Common File 
Although the common file can satisfied the workbench for the five systems, Progol, ACE, 1BC Prism 
and Weka, it still cannot be used as a comprehensive common file. There are several popular data 
mining systems, such as FOLP and Aleph, have not been considered in the project. The common file is 
not a really common format if some data mining systems have not been considered. Therefore, 
integrating more data mining systems would make an improvement for generating much better common 
file. 
 
7.2 Database Services 
When the databases are discussed, few people may be strange about them, particularly in data mining 
field. In this project, database technique has not been used. This is a big limitation of the workbench 
when users want to use their own database to transfer data. If they want to use the workbench, making a 
data file is required at the beginning. Therefore, the workbench should develop a connection between 
usersÕ database and itself, like Weka. That is absolutely essential part of a successfully compositive 
workbench. 
 
7.3 Conclusion 
The listed future works above are important. Finishing these functions, however, are not enough. For 
convenient, the workbench should provide more correct prompts during the users amending data. For 
accuracy, a perfect common file and transfer algorithms will be required. Nevertheless, there is not 
enough or mature theory to support this idea. To consummate the workbench, people need a mass of 
work. That would be long rough way.  
  
47 
 
BIBLIOGRAPGY 
 
[1] Agrawal R., H. Mannila, R. Srikant, H. Toivonen, A. I. Verkamo. Fast discovery of 
association rules. In U. Fayyad, G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, P. Smyth, R. Uthurusamy, editors, 
Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pages 307-328. The MIT Press, 
1996. 
 
[2] Blockeel H. , L. Dehaspe, J. Ramon, J. Struyf, A. Van Assche, C. Vens, D. Fierens. The 
ACE Data Mining System UserÕs Manual. Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, 2009. 
 
[3] Blockeel H., Luc De Raedt. Top-down induction of first-order logical decision trees. 
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Department of Computer Science Celestijnenlaan 200A, 
3001 Heverlee, Belgium. Artificial Intelligence 101 285-297, 1998. 
 
[4] Bongard M.. Pattern Recognition. Spartan Books, 1970. 
 
[5] Flach P.. Simply Logical Intelligent Reasoning by Example, the Netherlands John Wiley, 
1994. 
 
[6] Flach P. and Lachiche N.. 1BC: A First-Order Bayesian Classifier. In: Ninth International 
Workshop on Inductive Logic Programming (ILP'99), S. Dzeroski and P. Flach, editors, 
pages 92--103. Springer-Verlag, June 1999.  
 
[7] Krzysztof Cios, Witold Pedrycz, Roman Swiniarski. DATA MINING Methods for KNOWLEDGE 
DISCOVERY. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1998. 
 
[8] Lachiche N. and Flach P.. 1BC2: a true first-order Bayesian classifier. In: Proceedings of 
the 12th International Conference on Inductive Logic Programming, pages 133--148. 
Springer-Verlag, July 2002.  
 
 
[9] Mark Hall, Eibe Frank, Geoffrey Holmes, Bernhard Pfahringer, Peter Reutemann, Ian H. 
Witten. The WEKA Data Mining Software: An Update. SIGKDD Explorations, Volume 11, 
Issue 1, 2009. 
 
[10] Muggleton. Inverse entailment and Progol. New Generation Computing, 13:245-286, 1995. 
 
[11] Muggleton, John Firth. CProgol4.4: a tutorial introduction. Department of Computer 
Science, University of York, United Kingdom. 
 
[12] Nilsson U., Jan Maluszynski. Logic programming and progol (2ED). John Wiley & Sons 
Ltd. 2000. Page 19-31. 
 
48 
 
[13] Pfenning F.. Logic Programming. Carnegie Mellon University. 15-819K. 2006. Page 1-14. 
 
 
[14] Quinlan J.R.. Induction of decision trees. Machine learning, 1:81-106, 1986. 
 
 
[15] Quinlan J. R.. C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning. Morgan Kaufmann series in Machine 
learning. Morgan Kaufmann, 1993. 
 
[16] Raedt. Logical and Relational Learning. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2008. Page 
1-287. 
 
[17] Ray O.. Hybrid Abductive Inductive Learning, PhD thesis, University of London, Imperial 
College of Science, Technology and Medicine, Department of Computing, UK, 2005. 
 
[18] Srihari K. S.. BET: An ILP Workbench with a Generic ILP Engine. Department of 
Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay, Mumbai 400 
076. 
 
[19] Taisuke Sato, Neng-fa Zhou, Yoshitaka Kameya and Yusuke Izumi. PRISM UserÕs Manual 
(Version 2.0). Tokyo Institute of Technology, CUNY Brooklyn College, 2010. 
 
[20] Zupan Blaz, Gregor Leban, Janez Demsar, Tomaz Curk. Widgets and Visual Programming. 
Orange Data Mining Fruitful & Fun, 2010. 
 
 
  
49 
 
APPENDIX A: Source Code (Partial) 
 
Download page for Progol Result 
<%@ page language="java" import="java.util.*,java.io.*,com.jiao.file.*" 
 pageEncoding="GBK"%> 
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 4.01 Transitional//EN"> 
<html> 
 <head> 
  <title>A Knowledge Workbench for Structured Data -- Download 
   Progol Result Page</title> 
 </head> 
 <body> 
  <% 
   String path11 = this.getServletContext().getRealPath( 
     "./files/resultprogol/"); 
   File file11 = new File(path11); 
   File[] files11 = file11.listFiles(); 
   String file = "" + files11[0]; 
 
   // clear outputstream 
   out.clear(); 
   out = pageContext.pushBody(); 
 
   //import smartupload 
   SmartUpload upload = new SmartUpload(); 
   upload.initialize(pageContext); 
   upload.setContentDisposition(null); 
   upload.downloadFile(file); 
  %> 
 </body> 
</html> 
 
The following code is from layout.css that decide the global style settings 
@charset "utf-8"; 
/* CSS Document */ 
 
/* Global style*/ 
body { margin:0 auto; font-size:12px; font-family:Verdana; line-height:1.5;} 
ul,dl,dd,h1,h2,h3,h4,h5,h6,form,p { padding:0; margin:0; font-family: Verdana; } 
ul { list-style:none;} 
img { border:0px;} 
input,button,select,textarea{ outline:none;} 
textarea{resize:none;} 
50 
 
a { color:#05a; text-decoration:none;} 
a:hover { color:#f00;} 
.clearfloat {clear:both;height:0;font-size: 1px;line-height: 0px;}  
/* Global style-end*/ 
 
The following codes are the partial of the tranin methods for Progol 
private DeleteAnnotation deleteannotation = new DeleteAnnotation(); 
 private Check check = new Check(); 
 private AppendFiles appendFile = new AppendFiles(); 
 private Enterafterstop eas = new Enterafterstop(); 
 private Inputfullstop ifs = new Inputfullstop(); 
 
 // Transform the progol file into common file 
 public void transinForProgol(File filePathUpload, File filePathComm, 
   File fileNoAnn, File tempProgol, File temp) { 
  String str = null; 
  String commonFile = filePathComm + "/" + "commonfile.cmff"; 
 
  // Delete annotations in the files 
  deleteannotation.deleteAnnotation(filePathUpload, fileNoAnn); 
 
  /* 
   * Input full stop for the sentences which do not have ",", ":-", "?" 
   * and "." 
   */ 
  ifs.inputFullStop(fileNoAnn, temp); 
 
  // Each sentence end by full stop 
  eas.enterafterstop(fileNoAnn, temp, tempProgol); 
 
  String[] file = tempProgol.list(); 
  String fileProgol = tempProgol + "/" + file[0]; 
  try { 
   BufferedReader inProgol = new BufferedReader(new FileReader( 
     fileProgol)); 
   while ((str = inProgol.readLine()) != null) { 
    String content = ""; 
    if (StackCheck.stackCheck(str)) { 
     if (check.check(str, ".*[^\\?\\.]$")) { 
      content = "from(Progol):-other{" + str + "}."; 
      appendFile.appendFile(commonFile, content + "\n"); 
     } 
     // match set and unset 
     else if (check 
51 
 
       .check(str, 
        
 "^\\s*\\:\\-\\s*((un)*set\\s*\\(\\s*[a-zA-Z]+\\s*(\\s*\\,\\s*[0-9a-zA-Z]+\\s*)?\\s*\\)\\s*\\,?\\s*)+\\s*\\?\\s*$")) { 
      String[] dataArr = str 
        .split("\\:\\-|\\s*\\)\\s*\\,\\s*|\\s*\\)\\s*\\?\\s*"); 
      for (int i = 1; i < dataArr.length; i++) { 
       if (check.check(str, ".*set\\b.*")) { 
        String[] dataArr1 = dataArr[i] 
          .split("\\s*\\(\\s*"); 
        if (check.check(dataArr1[1], ".*\\,.*")) { 
         String[] dataArr2 = dataArr1[1] 
           .split("\\s*\\,\\s*"); 
         content = "from(Progol):-set(" 
           + dataArr2[0] + "),value(" 
           + dataArr2[1] + ").\n"; 
        } else { 
         content = "from(Progol):-set(" 
           + dataArr1[1] + "),value($).\n"; 
        } 
       } else if (check.check(str, ".*unset\\b.*")) { 
        String[] dataArr1 = dataArr[i] 
          .split("\\s*\\(\\s*"); 
        if (check.check(dataArr1[1], ".*\\,.*")) { 
         String[] dataArr2 = dataArr1[1] 
           .split("\\s*\\,\\s*"); 
         content = "from(Progol):-unset(" 
           + dataArr2[0] + "),value(" 
           + dataArr2[1] + ").\n"; 
        } else { 
         content = "from(Progol):-unset(" 
           + dataArr1[1] + "),value($).\n"; 
        } 
       } 
       appendFile.appendFile(commonFile, content); 
      } 
     } 
     // match fixedseed 
     else if (check.check(str, 
       "^\\s*\\:\\-\\s*fixedseed\\b\\s*\\?$")) { 
      content = "from(Progol):-fixedseed(yes).\n"; 
      appendFile.appendFile(commonFile, content); 
     } 
     // Match settings with :- constraint and commutative. 
     else if (check 
52 
 
       .check(str, 
        
 "^\\s*\\:\\-\\s*[constraint|commutative]+\\s*\\(\\s*[_a-z0-9\\/\\s*]+\\)\\s*\\?\\s*$")) { 
      String[] dataArr = str 
        .split("\\s*\\:\\-\\s*|\\s*\\(\\s*|\\s*\\)\\s*\\?\\s*"); 
      content = "from(Progol):-parameter(" + dataArr[1] 
        + "),value(" + dataArr[2] + ").\n"; 
      appendFile.appendFile(commonFile, content); 
     } 
     // match modeh 
     else if (check 
       .check(str, 
        
 "^\\s*:-\\s*modeh\\s*\\(\\s*([\\-0-9\\*]*\\s*\\,)+\\s*(not)*\\s*[_a-z]+\\s*\\(\\s*[\\s\\+\\#\\-\\(\\)\\[\\]\\|\\=_a-zA-Z0-
9]+\\s*(\\,\\s*[\\s\\#\\+\\-\\(\\)\\[\\]\\|\\=_a-zA-Z0-9]*)*\\s*\\)\\s*\\)\\s*\\?\\s*$")) { 
      String[] dataArr4 = str.split(",", 2); 
      String[] dataArr5 = dataArr4[0].split("\\("); 
      String[] dataArr6 = dataArr5[0].split("-"); 
      content = "from(Progol):-head_name(" + dataArr6[1] 
        + "),"; 
      content = content + "head_int(" + dataArr5[1] + "),"; 
      if (check 
        .check(dataArr4[1], 
         
 "^\\s*not\\s*[_a-z]+\\s*\\(\\s*[\\s\\+\\#\\-\\(\\)\\[\\]\\|\\=_a-zA-Z0-9]+\\s*(\\,\\s*[\\s\\#\\+\\-\\(\\)\\[\\]\\|\\=_a-zA-Z0
-9]*)*\\s*\\)\\s*\\)\\s*\\?\\s*$")) { 
       content = content + "not(yes),arity($),"; 
       String[] dataArr7 = dataArr4[1].split("[\\(\\)]"); 
       String[] dataArr8 = dataArr7[0].split(" "); 
       content = content + "head_predict(" 
         + dataArr8[dataArr8.length - 1] + ")"; 
       content = content + ",head_predict_name(" 
         + dataArr7[1] + ")"; 
      } else { 
       content = content + "not(no),arity($),"; 
       String[] dataArr7 = dataArr4[1].split("[\\(\\)]"); 
       content = content + "head_predict(" + dataArr7[0] 
         + ")"; 
       content = content + ",head_predict_name(" 
         + dataArr7[1] + ")"; 
      } 
      content = content + ".\n"; 
      appendFile.appendFile(commonFile, content); 
     } 
53 
 
     // Match modeb 
     else if (check 
       .check(str, 
        
 "^\\s*:-\\s*modeb\\s*\\(\\s*([\\-0-9\\*]*\\s*\\,)+\\s*(not)*\\s*[_a-z]*\\s*\\(\\s*[\\s\\+\\#\\-\\(\\)\\[\\]\\|\\=_a-zA-Z0-
9]+\\s*(\\,\\s*[\\s\\#\\+\\-\\(\\)\\[\\]\\|\\=_a-zA-Z0-9]*)*\\s*\\)\\s*\\)\\s*\\?\\s*$")) { 
      String[] dataArr4 = str.split(",", 2); 
      String[] dataArr5 = dataArr4[0].split("\\("); 
      String[] dataArr6 = dataArr5[0].split("-"); 
      content = "from(Progol):-body_name(" + dataArr6[1] 
        + "),"; 
      content = content + "body_int(" + dataArr5[1] + "),"; 
      if (check 
        .check(dataArr4[1], 
         
 "^\\s*not\\s*[_a-z]*\\s*\\(\\s*[\\s\\+\\#\\-\\(\\)\\[\\]\\|\\=_a-zA-Z0-9]+\\s*(\\,\\s*[\\s\\#\\+\\-\\(\\)\\[\\]\\|\\=_a-zA-Z0
-9]*)*\\s*\\)\\s*\\)\\s*\\?\\s*$")) { 
       content = content + "not(yes),arity($),"; 
       String[] dataArr7 = dataArr4[1].split("[\\(\\)]"); 
       String[] dataArr8 = dataArr7[0].split(" "); 
       content = content + "body_predict(" 
         + dataArr8[dataArr8.length - 1] + ")"; 
       content = content + ",body_predict_name(" 
         + dataArr7[1] + "),repetition($),cwa($)"; 
      } else { 
       content = content + "not(no),arity($),"; 
       String[] dataArr7 = dataArr4[1].split("[\\(\\)]"); 
       content = content + "body_predict(" + dataArr7[0] 
         + ")"; 
       if (check.check(dataArr4[1], ".*[\\(\\)].*")) { 
        content = content + ",body_predict_name(" 
          + dataArr7[1] 
          + "),repetition($),cwa($)"; 
       } else { 
        content = content 
          + ",body_predict_name($),repetition($),cwa($)"; 
       } 
      } 
      content = content + ".\n"; 
      appendFile.appendFile(commonFile, content); 
     } 
     // Match Integrity Constraint 
     else if (check.check(str, 
       "^\\s*(false\\b)*\\:\\-.*[A-Z]+.*\\.$") 
54 
 
       && !check.check(str, ".*\\?.*")) { 
      content = "from(Progol):-integrity{" + str + "}.\n"; 
      appendFile.appendFile(commonFile, content); 
     } 
     // Match rules 
     else if (check 
       .check(str, 
        
 ".*[_a-z0-9]+(\\([\\'\\,\\;\\[\\|\\]\\(\\)\\$_a-z0-9A-Z]*\\))?\\s*\\:\\-\\s*[\\'\\,\\;\\[\\|\\]\\(\\)\\$_a-z0-9A-Z]+.*$")) { 
      content = "from(Progol):-rule{" + str + "}.\n"; 
      appendFile.appendFile(commonFile, content); 
     } 
     // Match rules 
     else if (check 
       .check(str, 
         "\\s*[_a-z0-9]+\\s*\\(\\s*[\\[\\]\\(\\)_A-Za-z0-9\\,]+\\s*\\)\\s*\\.\\s*$") 
       && check.check(str, ".*[A-Z]+.*")) { 
      content = "from(Progol):-rule{" + str + "}.\n"; 
      appendFile.appendFile(commonFile, content); 
     } 
     // Match fact 
     else if (check 
       .check(str, 
         "^\\s*[_a-z0-9]+\\s*(\\(\\s*[\\-_a-z0-9]+.*\\))?\\.\\s*$") 
       && !check.check(str, ".*\\?.*") 
       && !check.check(str, ".*mode[h|b].*")) { 
      if (check.check(str, "^\\s*set\\b.*")) { 
       content = "from(Progol):-other{" + str + "}.\n"; 
      } else if (check.check(str, ".*[\\:\\-]+.*")) { 
       content = "from(Progol):-other{" + str + "}.\n"; 
      } else if (check.check(str, ".*\\)[_a-z0-9]+.*")) { 
       content = "from(Progol):-other{" + str + "}.\n"; 
      } else if (check.check(str, ".*[A-Z]+.*")) { 
       content = "from(Progol):-other{" + str + "}.\n"; 
      } else if (check.check(str, 
        ".*[_0-9a-z]\\s+[_0-9a-z].*")) { 
       content = "from(Progol):-other{" + str + "}.\n"; 
      } else if (check.check(str, 
        "^\\s*[_a-z0-9]+(\\,[_a-z0-9]+)+\\)\\.$")) { 
       content = "from(Progol):-other{" + str + "}.\n"; 
      } else if (check.check(str, "^\\s*[_a-z0-9]+\\.$")) { 
       content = "from(Progol):-fact{" + str + "}.\n"; 
      } else { 
       content = "from(Progol):-fact{" + str + "}.\n"; 
55 
 
      } 
      appendFile.appendFile(commonFile, content); 
     } 
     // Match rules 
     else if (check 
       .check(str, 
         "^\\s*[_a-z0-9]+\\s*\\(\\s*[\\,\\[\\]\\_a-z0-9A-Z]+\\s*\\)\\s*\\.\\s*$")) { 
      content = "from(Progol):-rule{" + str + "}.\n"; 
      appendFile.appendFile(commonFile, content); 
     } 
     // Match Negative Example 
     else if (check.check(str, "^\\s*\\:\\-.*\\.$") 
       && !check.check(str, ".*\\?.*") 
       && !check.check(str, ".*mode[h|b].*")) { 
      content = "from(Progol):-negative{" + str + "}.\n"; 
      appendFile.appendFile(commonFile, content); 
     } else { 
      content = "from(Progol):-other{" + str + "}."; 
      appendFile.appendFile(commonFile, content + "\n"); 
     } 
    } else { 
     content = "from(Progol):-other{" + str + "}."; 
     appendFile.appendFile(commonFile, content + "\n"); 
    } 
   } 
   inProgol.close(); 
  } catch (IOException e) { 
   e.printStackTrace(); 
  } 
 } 
 
The Java Code here is for calling ACE systems without stuck 
 public void runaceCommand(String command, File result) { 
  String result1 = result + ""; 
  AppendFiles af = new AppendFiles(); 
  try { 
   ProcessBuilder pb = new ProcessBuilder(command); 
   pb.redirectErrorStream(true); 
   Process p = pb.start(); 
   p.getOutputStream().close(); 
   BufferedReader br = new BufferedReader(new InputStreamReader( 
     p.getInputStream())); 
   String tmp = null; 
   while ((tmp = br.readLine()) != null) { 
56 
 
    af.appendFile(result1, tmp + "\n"); 
   } 
  } catch (IOException e) { 
   e.printStackTrace(); 
  } 
 } 
 
The following Code is JavaScript that is used to control Top Tag 
// JavaScript Document 
// swith tag 
function switchTag(tag,content) 
{ 
 for(i=1; i <=6; i++) 
 { 
  if ("tag"+i==tag) 
  { 
   document.getElementById(tag).getElementsByTagName("a")[0].className="selectli"+i; 
  
 document.getElementById(tag).getElementsByTagName("a")[0].getElementsByTagName("span")[0].classNam
e="selectspan"+i; 
  }else{ 
   document.getElementById("tag"+i).getElementsByTagName("a")[0].className=""; 
  
 document.getElementById("tag"+i).getElementsByTagName("a")[0].getElementsByTagName("span")[0].class
Name=""; 
  } 
  if ("content"+i==content) 
  { 
   document.getElementById(content).className=""; 
  }else{ 
   document.getElementById("content"+i).className="hidecontent"; 
  } 
  document.getElementById("content").className=content; 
 } 
} 
 
The following code is shell that is used to run 1BC 
#run_1bc.sh 
#!/bin/bash 
cd /usr/apache-tomcat-7.0.19/webapps/KnowledgeWorkbench/files/temp1bc/ 
while getopts "a:b:c:d:" arg 
do 
        case $arg in 
             a) 
57 
 
                ;; 
             b) 
                ;; 
             c) 
                ;; 
             d) 
                ;; 
             ?) 
            echo "unkonw argument" 
        exit 1 
        ;; 
        esac 
done 
/root/1BCs/1BC -r $2 $4 $6 $8 
 
The following code is in the XML, which show the index page, the error page when 404, 500 
and java.lang.NullException encountered. 
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<web-app version="3.0" xmlns="http://java.sun.com/xml/ns/javaee" 
 xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" 
 xsi:schemaLocation="http://java.sun.com/xml/ns/javaee  
 http://java.sun.com/xml/ns/javaee/web-app_3_0.xsd"> 
 <display-name></display-name> 
 <welcome-file-list> 
  <welcome-file>index.jsp</welcome-file> 
 </welcome-file-list> 
 <error-page> 
  <error-code>404</error-code> 
  <location>/erroroperation.jsp</location> 
 </error-page> 
 <error-page> 
  <error-code>500</error-code> 
  <location>/erroroperation.jsp</location> 
 </error-page> 
 <error-page> 
  <exception-type>java.lang.NullException</exception-type> 
  <location>/erroroperation.jsp</location> 
 </error-page> 
</web-app> 
