w1 
 
Abstract 
Nowadays, smartphones are the latest technology of mobile devices and they are used 
massively. They combine the functionality of many devices and present a variety of different 
capabilities. Their portability is another reason that they are preferred by users. During the 
years, many applications have been created in order to satisfy the needs of users and new 
technologies have been added in the platforms. 
One emerging category of applications is mobile payments. There are different methods for 
mobile commerce and users have begun using their mobile devices for their purchases. A 
new promising technology for mobile commerce has been developed and it is called 
contactless payments. The protocol used for proximity transactions and communication is 
called Near Field Communication (NFC). NFC has not yet been implemented in all the 
mobile phones and smartphones, but many researchers have been interested in it. 
Smartphones in combination with NFC can create a new evolutionary application, the mobile 
wallet; a virtual wallet, which is designed to replace the wallet.  
However, before this idea is feasible there are several issues that need consideration. 
Applications using NFC require storage for essential information and during payment 
transactions a part of the information is sent to a reader. Thus, many questions have been 
created considering how secure this new technology is. The aim of this project is to identify 
the possible risks and propose the security mechanisms that should be implemented in the 
protocol. 
This project is an investigatory project (Type II). It is motivated by a real world issue and 
includes some research in order to produce an assessment about conducting contactless 
payments using a mobile phone/smartphone integrated with the NFC technology. The 
methodology that is used is product engineering, because we investigate a subject that 
requires possible solutions. The difference between the final thesis and the interim report is 
that the interim report presented smartphones and their threats in general and the final thesis 
focuses on a more specific subject.  
This project presents a research on the relevant background and a risk assessment is 
conducted in order to identify the risks of using NFC for payments and communication. The 
most urgent risks are identified and security mechanisms are proposed based on the research 
that has already been done in the area. 
? Research was conducted to gain more knowledge about Smartphones, Mobile 
Commerce, Contactless Payments and Near Field Communication (NFC).  
? Presentation of the components that are required by NFC and presentation of possible 
scenarios when making a payment or establishing a communication.  
? The possible risks and threats were identified. 
? Quantitative Risk Assessment was used to evaluated the risks. 
? Solutions and security mechanisms were proposed.  
  
2 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
I would like to thank my supervisor, Dr. Theodore Tryfonas for his continuous guidance and 
support throughout my thesis. His advice and feedback have been proved invaluable. 
I would also like to thank my family and my closest friends for the support and understanding 
they have shown during my studies.  
 
  
3 
 
Contents 
Abstract ..1 
Acknowledgements 2 
Contents..3 
1. Introduction............................................................................................................5 
 1.1 Aims and Objectives.5 
 1.2 Structure ...5 
2. Background 6 
 2.1 Overview...6 
 2.2 Smartphones 6 
  2.2.1 Operating System and Security Mechanisms8 
 2.3 Mobile Payments.....14 
 2.4 Contactless Payments..16 
 2.5 Near Field Communication ....17 
 2.6 Radio Frequency Identification...22 
 2.7 Wallet Applications ....23 
  2.7.1 Osaifu-Keitai....23 
  2.7.2 Google Wallet..24 
 2.8 Security Concerns...25 
  2.8.1 Malicious Software......26 
 2.9 Consumer Perspective27 
3. Risk Assessment...29 
 3.1 Overview29 
 3.2 Methodology..29 
 3.3 Quantitative Risk Analysis.31 
  3.3.1 Definition of context...31 
  3.3.2 Identify and Analyze the Risks...36 
4 
 
 3.4 Classification of Risk.40 
4. Results and Solutions ..42 
 4.1 Overview42 
 4.2 Security Objectives43 
 4.3 Encryption Schemes...43 
 4.4 Security model...46 
5. Discussion48 
6. Future Work50 
 6.1 Risk Assessment on Smartphones.50 
 6.2 Creation of a more robust protocol...50 
References ..51 
  
5 
 
1. Introduction 
 
This chapter presents the aims and objectives of this project and then explains the structure of 
the project and how each chapter is organized. 
 
1.1 Aims and Objectives 
The aim of this project is to assess the security of mobile phones and smartphones. The 
project focuses on one specific field; the Near Field Communication technology when 
integrated into a mobile phone or smarthphone. The technology is added in mobile phones / 
smartphones for communication and for performing payments. However, because it is a novel 
technology, it not wet widely used and mobile operating systems have not started using it. 
The project examines how secure this technology is. 
The project has two different objectives. The first objective is to present the background 
information in order to introduce the concepts that are used in the project. The second 
objective is to conduct a risk assessment to specify the levels of protection the NFC protocol 
integrates. The risk assessment has different stages. First, we define the context and 
components that interact with the protocol when performing payment or when they want to 
communicate with another user. The NFC protocol can be used in a variety of possible 
activities. Then, the proposed scenarios should be examined in order to investigate the 
existence of possible risks. The risks can be classified, specifying which are the most urgent. 
Finally, the last stage is to propose solutions for the found risks in order to reduce them.    
  
1.2 Structure 
The project is organized in 6 different chapters. The second chapter presents some 
background information. The smartphone and the most famous operating systems of 
smartphones are presented. Then, the mobile payments are explained and we focus on the 
contactless payments and on the capabilities of NFC. The chapter ends specifying some 
security concers. The third chapter refers to the risk assessment. The methodology is 
explained and we present some scenarios of enabled mobile phones with NFC when 
performing payments. The scenarios are examined and the risks are presented based on 
possible threats.  The risks are evaluated and the most urgent risks can be found. In chapter 
four, solutions are suggested based on previous research, it is checked if the solutions can be 
applicable and a more general security model is presented. Chapter 5 evaluates the work of 
this project and chapter 6 proposes future work.  
6 
 
2. Background 
 
2.1 Overview 
In this chapter, we present information in order to introduce the concepts that are going to be 
examined in the next chapters. We begin by explaining what smartphones are, their features 
and the operating systems that were implemented for smartphones with their security 
mechanisms. We proceed with introducing what mobile payments are and we emphasize on 
contactless payments and Near Field Communication. The technology is presented and RFID 
technology. Finally, security concerns are presented. 
 
2.2 Smartphones 
Mobile phones are the most massively used mobile devices (Satyanarayanan, 2005). 
Researchers and designers are always searching for new functionalities to include in mobile 
phones in order to make them more useful in everyday life (Satyanarayanan, 2005). 
Satyanarayanan (2005) poses the question about whether a mobile device should be 
characterized as a Swiss army knife or as a wallet. This characterization aims to emphasize if 
the added functionality to a mobile phone can be used to provide personalized services to a 
user or not (Satyanarayanan, 2005). Through the years, mobile phones have evolved into 
programmable and networked mobile devices (Töyssy and Helenius, 2006) and thus, the need 
to carry a number of different devices is reduced (Ortiz, 2006). This constant evolvement of 
mobile phones has led to the introduction of smartphones.  
Smartphones are the newest technology of mobile phones and are already used by a great 
proportion of people. They have appeared a few years ago, but they have known a rapid 
expansion, mainly because their primary goal is to be used as communication tools (Lessard 
and Kessler, 2010). When they appeared, they had a low percentage in the mobile market, but 
as it was expected this situation was altered (Chang et al., 2008). It was announced that in the 
U.S.A by the end of 2009, 46.3% of mobile phones were smartphones (Lessard and Kessler, 
2010).  
On their first appearance, they were using 2G (second generation) technology but they have 
evolved to the 3G (third generation) technology (Chang et al., 2008). Smartphones seem to be 
able to combine much functionality of different devices in just one. More specifically, there is 
a convergence between the features of a regular mobile phone and the features of a personal 
digital assistant (PDA) (Töyssy and Helenius, 2006). A smartphone has also operations of other 
devices such as an audio player, a digital camera, a GPS receiver (Schmidt and Albayrak, 2008). As a 
result, this technology can attract different sets of users (Barton et al., 2006).  
Smartphones have some characteristics of the latest technology. They have fast CPUs, large 
amounts of RAM, high-speed data connection, Bluetooth and Infrared for small range 
connections and wireless LAN (Local Area Network) (Schmidt and Albayrak, 2008). The 
different types of connectivity allow users to browse the web, to read and send emails, to 
send instant messages and to play online multi-user games. (Schmidt and Albayrak, 2008). 
They also have some other capabilities using different types of sensors. An example of 
sensing is positioning and many location-based applications have been implemented (Raento 
et al., 2009).  
7 
 
The most important feature of smartphones is the wide range of applications that has been 
created in order to satisfy the needs of a user (Varshney, 2002). There are 2 different kinds of 
applications; the applications that are needed for the functionality of the device and the 
applications that provide communication, information and entertainment (Barrera and Van 
Oorschot, 2011). The applications developed for the second category are mainly third-party 
applications. Many platforms encourage the development of third-party applications by 
providing the application programming interfaces (APIs), emulators and tools (Barrera and 
Van Oorschot, 2011). Third- party applications can be installed on a platform easily based on 
the policy of the platform. 
Many researchers have proposed different features that a user should expect to find in a 
smartphone. A smartphone platform is considered to be successful when it provides ease of 
use, its appearance is appealing and it is not heavy (Chang et al., 2008). Chang et al. (2008) 
recommend some features that should be integrated in a smartphone; eleven must-have 
features and eight desirable features. These features are described below. 
Must-have features: 
1. “Multi-tasking operating system” (Chang et al., 2008: 741): The operating system of a 
smartphone should be able to execute simultaneously more than one task in order to 
correspond to the many applications that exist on it. 
2. Powerful Processor: The processor that is embodied in a smartphone should offer 3 
different functions; communication function, signal processing, device and data 
handling. 
3. QWERTY keyboard for writing functions 
4. Large displays with high screen resolution 
5. High speed internet access: Internet access is needed for web browsing, sending and 
receiving emails and audio-video streaming. 
6. “Business Productivity Tool” (Chang et al., 2008: 741): Smartphones should have the 
ability to support business actions and offer the appropriate software. 
7. E-mail, SMS, MMS, IM services 
8. Personal Information Management: A user should to be able to store personal 
information on the device such as phone numbers and appointments. 
9. Host synchronization: Smartphones should have the ability to synchronize with other 
devices, either a computer or another smartphone in order to share data between them.  
10. Voice communication and voice-mail: The main function of a smartphone is the 
ability to conduct phone calls. 
11. WiFi and Bluetooth: Wireless technologies for connection to the Internet and 
communication with other devices  
Desirable features: 
1. Gaming: Users are interested in playing games while traveling or waiting for an 
appointment, because it is a relaxing activity. This feature eliminates the need of an 
extra device.  
2. Camera: Users have engaged the addition of cameras in mobile phones and they have 
shown that it is a useful feature. Thus, it is expected that smartphones include this 
feature as well. 
3. File management and manipulation of the files that are stored on the device 
4. Video/audio streaming 
8 
 
5. Music player and mobile TV: This feature is used for the entertainment of users and it 
can also replace mobile devices such as MP3 players. 
6. GPS and navigation: This feature extends the usage of a smartphone and it can be 
helpful for people. 
7. Open standard Input/output communication and storage expansion: The architecture 
design of smartphones enables users to add more memory in the device. The extra slot 
of memory is able to communicate with the device and the user can access the data 
stored in it.  
8. Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) and biometric features: This feature is 
desirable in order to enhance the security of the mobile device. Biometric features 
(fingerprints or voice recognition) can be used for authentication. Moreover, the 
ability to read RFID tags expands the functionality of the device. 
In general, a smartphone has the properties of a mobile phone but also has many properties of 
a computer (Töyssy and Helenius, 2006). However, it is difficult to make a precise distinction 
between smartphones and computer, because they exchange some of their features (Töyssy 
and Helenius, 2006). On the other hand, smartphones cannot reach the capabilities of a 
personal computer on certain domains because of their complexity (Barton et al., 2006). 
Many researchers have expressed the opinion that smartphones have evolved quickly from 
their first appearance and are more powerful than desktop computers where 10 years ago 
(Barrera and Van Oorschot, 2011).  
Smartphones are preferred by the majority of people. The main reason is their small size and 
the ability to carry them everywhere. Thus, people use smartphones for their everyday 
activities and store great amounts of personal data (Barrera and Van Oorschot, 2011). They 
access the internet, they access their bank accounts, they save personal information, such as 
passwords, appointments, things they want to remember. A smartphone can describe the 
character of its owner. 
Although, smartphones present a new kind of technology and are part of introducing 
ubiquitous computing in our lives, they pose many challenges because of their nature. One of 
them is security (Barton et al., 2006). Users should be reassured that their personal 
information will not be accessed by third parties and their privacy will be preserved (Barton 
et al., 2006).  
 
2.2.1 Operating Systems and Security Mechanisms 
During the years many operating systems for smartphones have appeared. However, there is 
not a standard design for a unified platform in smartphones (Chang et al, 2008). Some 
operating systems were designed for Personal Digital Assistants (PDAs) and others for 
exclusive use in smartphones. Each operating system is not designed for a particular brand of 
smartphones. A handheld maker company can use many different operating systems to 
different models of smartphones. However, Blackberry and iPhone design and use their own 
operating systems.  
2.2.1.1 Symbian OS 
The Symbian Operating System (OS) was the dominant operating system of mobile devices 
and it was the first operating system that was created exclusively for smartphones (Vaughan-
Nichols, 2003). First, it was known as EPOC and was developed for Psion Series 5 PDA 
9 
 
(James, 2004). In 1996, the company was split and in 1998, Symbian Ltd introduced the 
Symbian OS to the public. The company is constituted by different handset companies, such 
as Ericsson, Motorola, Nokia, Panasonic, Samsung Electronics, Psion, Siemens and Sony 
Ericsson.  
According to James (2004), the devices with Symbian OS were using ARM and StrongARM 
processors, something that continues until today. Flash memory is used for storing programs, 
while the operating system is stored in flash ROM. Smartphones that implement Symbian can 
store a large amount of data and can serve multiple threads simultaneously (Töyssy and 
Helenius, 2006). Symbian also offers Bluetooth connectivity and uses some other open 
standards like Java and SyncML. Furthermore, Symbian OS offers features that are expected 
from a smartphone. Some of the features are video - camera, audio, instant messaging, 
organizer. (Vaughan-Nichols, 2003) 
The design of Symbian OS is focused on good functionality and not on compatibility with 
other platforms. As a result, this operating system focuses on security. Symbian-specific 
libraries and frameworks were developed in order to provide device security and avoid buffer 
overflow attacks. A cleanup mechanism that manages resources is responsible to make sure 
that denial of service will not appear (James, 2004).   
Security at the application layer is managed by assuring that each application is a different 
process and does not have access to the memory stack of another process neither can access 
the memory of the operating system. The security of Symbian OS is based on 3 different 
ways; capabilities, installation file signing and data caging. Capabilities define access to APIs 
(Application Programming Interface). Installation file signing refers to signed applications. 
Each application, in order to be considered valid and to be able to be installed on Symbian 
OS must be signed. During the signing process, certificates are produced that define one of 
the three levels of limitation where on the highest level is full device and network access.  
These are all contained in installation packages, which are referred to as SIS(Symbian OS 
Installation System) files. Data caging is responsible for permitting access to the file system. 
Based on the SIS files and certificates each application has certain privileges. (Schmidt and 
Albayrak, 2008).   
Unfortunately, the security mechanisms that Symbian OS implements are not sufficient 
against attacks. The procedure for signing applications is expensive, so the application 
developers do not prefer it. However, a user is informed when they are trying to install an 
unregistered application in order to prevent the installation of a malicious package (James, 
2004). The applications that offer services to users can be signed by their creators, but if the 
applications require to modify the settings of the system files then a signing process from 
Symbian is required (Barrera and Van Oorschot, 2011). Another drawback of Symbian OS is 
the lack of an encryption algorithm for the user data. This means that an attacker can have 
access to essential information (James, 2004).   
 
2.2.1.2 Palm OS 
The Palm OS was initially developed for PDAs and was released in 1998 by PalmSource. 
The first version of Palm OS was designed for the first PDA, Palm Pilot. Schmidt and 
Albayrak (2008) and Vaughan-Nichols (2003) mention that after several different versions of 
Palm OS, there have been made some adjustments in the operating system with the addition 
of some APIs, in order to be used in smartphones. Specifically, version 5 and 6 were able to 
10 
 
support the high demands of a smartphone. Consequently, the Palm OS is able to execute 
multiple tasks such as time management, audio playback and using Wireless Connectivity, 
web browsing, email and instant messaging. It has also the ability to support the features of a 
mobile phone (Vaughan-Nichols, 2003).  
The early versions of Palm OS did not have any specific security features. However, they 
used the application signing and only applications with privileges could be executed (Schmidt 
and Albayrak, 2008). The lack of security features was because Palm OS had not been a 
target from attackers (Töyssy and Helenius, 2006). Later versions of Palm OS included more 
security features. Palm OS was empowered with 128-bit secure sockets layer encryption 
technology and with virtual private networking software (Vaughan-Nichols, 2003).  
 
2.2.1.3 Windows Phone 7 
Windows Phone 7 is the current operating system of the company Microsoft and is the 
successor of Windows Mobile. Microsoft has presented different operating systems over the 
years. The first operating system of Microsoft that could be used on mobile phones was the 
Microsoft Pocket PC Phone Edition (Töyssy and Helenius, 2006). Other operating systems 
that have been created before the appearance of Windows Phone 7 are Microsoft Smartphone 
2002 and Windows Mobile with different versions such as Windows Mobile 2003, Windows 
Mobile 5 etc. The previous versions of Windows Phone 7, were not only targeting the mobile 
phone market, but could also be used in PDAs. The company was most interested in the 
needs of enterprises, but with Windows Phone 7, Microsoft focuses on consumers.   
During the years that Symbian OS was the dominant operating system among smartphones, 
Microsoft?s Smartphone 2002 was also used by a large proportion of users (Vaughan-
Nichols, 2003). Smartphone 2002 offered a wide range of features except telephone 
functionality, but it did not offer touch-screen capabilities in order for users to use only the 
one hand (Vaughan-Nichols, 2003). On the other hand, Windows Mobile offered more 
features and included some security measures that focus on security roles, security policies 
and application signing (Schmidt and Albayrak, 2008). Security roles specify the rights of a 
user or a group of users, while security policies give permission for the execution of certain 
actions. Finally, the application signing is the procedure of identifying that an application 
does not carry any malware, as it was described to previous sections (Schmidt and Albayrak, 
2008).   
Mobile Phone 7 supports the above security measures. However, due to the large number of 
applications, the procedure of application signing is time-consuming and difficult. Therefore, 
many applications are not checked whether they contain malicious code or not or whether 
they access data or resources that are not entitled. In case the smartphone is lost, the operating 
system supports an application that the user can use in order to track the location of the 
smartphone, erase their data or lock the phone (Microsoft, 2011). Furthermore, there are not 
any encryption mechanisms on the device (Walker, 2010).   
 
2.2.1.4 Blackberry 
Blackberry is mostly designed as a business tool and is owned by the company Research In 
Motion (RIM) (Schmidt and Albayrak, 2008). Blackberry devices use their own operating 
11 
 
system in order to support the needs of their customers, who belong mostly in the business 
world. 
Security is a crucial matter for Blackberry devices and is considered during the design of the 
smartphone (Walker, 2010). Other smartphones do not follow the same policy and add 
security levels after (Lambert, 2005). In order to gain the trust of their customers and ensure 
the security of data, RIM uses different features of security that are implemented in the 
smartphone and in the Blackberry Enterprise Server (BES) (Lambert, 2005). 
To begin with, Blackberry implements encryption algorithms; Advanced Encryption Standard 
(AES) and Triple Data Encryption Standard (Triple DES) in order to protect data that travels 
between the device and the BES (Blackberry 2011). Each device is assigned with unique 
encryption keys that are created in a secure environment and are send to the device. The keys 
are stored in the device and in the user?s enterprise account. (Blackberry, 2011). With the first 
generation of keys the devices are also activated. (Lambert, 2005). 
In order for the BES to send information to the appropriate Blackberry device the encryption 
key and the Personal Identification Number (PIN) are used to identify the device (Lambert, 
2005). The BES sends data to a user which is encrypted with their private key from their 
private account. The encrypted data are decrypted with the private key stored in the device 
(Blackberry, 2011).    
In contrast to other smartphones, Blackberry disables direct device-to-device 
communications, in order to ensure that all communications pass from the BES gateway 
(Lambert, 2005). However, no decryption takes place between the BES gateway and the 
device to eliminate the possibility of leakage of information to eavesdroppers (Blackberry, 
2011). In addition, communications that can be decrypted with a valid key can take place in 
public networks. To increase the security of the device, outbound-initiated connections must 
be authenticated through the port 3101 of the firewall. Inbound traffic must be from the 
device or from the email server, so that they are authorized (Blackberry, 2011). 
The contents of a Blackberry device are secured with different ways. The user can interact 
with the device by using a password to authenticate their selves. There is a certain number of 
attempts that the user can enter a password and if it is incorrect, the memory of the device is 
deleted. Data that are stored in the device are also secure with the use of encryption. The AES 
encryption algorithm is used to protect saved passwords. Thus, applications cannot have 
access to essential information. (Blackberry, 2011) 
Furthermore, each application that is designed with the BlackBerry® Java™ Development 
Environment (JDE) should be signed by the RIM, so that it can be installed and have access 
to data stored in the device. Signed applications can be found in AppWorld, an application 
designed to inform users about the available applications (Barrera and Van Oorschot, 2011. 
On the other hand, distribution of non-signed applications is not restricted and they can be 
found on the developers? sites (Barrera and Van Oorschot, 2011. Third party applications can 
be installed on a Blackberry smartphone, however they are sandboxed and the execution is 
restricted only to their directory (Barrera and Van Oorschot, 2011). Each application should 
use a trusted certificate authority (CA) or a generated certificate, which should be made using 
the Public Key Infrastructure (X.509) standard (Blackberry, 2011).  
Finally, system administrators regularly check the security of the device based on the 
enterprise policy so that the device fills the security policy (Lambert, 2005). Security settings 
are sent via BES to ensure that all the Blackberry devices are adjusted to the most recent 
12 
 
security policy. Therefore, the protection of a Blackberry device is not left entirely to the user 
(Lambert, 2005).  
If the Blackberry device is lost, the user has the ability to erase remotely the data that are 
stored in the device. The data are not lost and the user can retrieve them through another 
device. The device can be set to erase the data automatically, if it is not connected to the 
network for a pre-defined period of time (Walker, 2010). 
 
2.2.1.5 iOS 
The iOS is the operating system designed for the Apple iPhone and the version that is 
currently used is 4. Version 5 is expected later in 2011. It was presented to the public with the 
name iPhoneOS and it was renamed to iOS in July 2010 (Barrera and Van Oorschot, 2011). 
When the iPhone was first appeared in June 2007 until today, it has known a huge success. 
Due to its appearance and style, and the big variety of applications it offers, iPhone has a 
large percentage in sales (Pandya, 2008). It is preferred by companies, because of its interface 
and the ability to execute simultaneously many applications. However, companies are 
adviced to increase the security of the smartphone with the addition of extra authentication 
measures (Walker, 2010).  
The iOS is basically a modified version of the Mac OS X operating system that was adapted 
in order to satisfy the needs of a smartphone. The iOS runs on ARM processors, which are 
more suitable for smartphones due to low consumption power (Miller et al, 2007). Some of 
the applications of the iOS are applications of Mac OS X which are adjusted, such as 
MobileSafari and MobileMail (Miller et al, 2007). Moreover, iOS presents several layers of 
abstraction in order to support a variety of applications (Barrera and Van Oorschot, 2011). 
The iOS implements different security features. Firstly, it offers hardware encryption and 
encrypts network communications. The 4-digit password required can be altered to satisfy the 
security needs of each user (Walker, 2010). In order to protect privacy issues, applications 
that need the location of the user, must have the consent of the user (Apple Inc, 2011). 
According to Miller et al (2007), write access is restricted in a specific area in the file system 
called sandbox and installation of third-party applications is restricted. This is done in order 
to eliminate “the attack surface of device” (Miller et al, 2007: 3) or “the device?s exposure to 
vulnerabilities” (Miller et al, 2007: 3). Third-party applications are only able to read and 
write data in their own directory and they require a signing process in order to be distributed 
to the public (Barrera and Van Oorschot, 2011). In addition, several features were removed 
from WebSafari and only certain file types can be downloaded to the device (Miller et al, 
2007). 
The iOS has the ability of erasing the stored data when the device is lost or stolen. This is 
achieved remotely, but it requires the existence of the original SIM and it must be connected 
to a network (Walker, 2010). The memory can also be erased after a number of unsuccessful 
attempts to unlock the phone (Apple Inc, 2011). 
The iOS is concerned to have a lot of vulnerabilities. Every key stroke is saved in a file with a 
capture of the homepage when the user unlocks the phone. Thus, an attacker may gain access 
to this file (Walker, 2010). Furthermore, an attacker can gain control of the device, because 
processes that send and receive data over the network use the user?s id (Miller et al, 2007). 
13 
 
Address Space Layout Randomization (ASLR) and non-executable heap are also not used 
and these flaws can be exploited by attackers (Pandya, 2008). 
 
2.2.1.6 Android 
The Android operating system is owned by Google and has been one of the most significant 
operating systems over the past few years. “Android is an application execution environment 
for mobile devices that includes an operating system, application framework and core 
applications” (Shabtai et al, 2009: 5).  
The Android operating system architecture has four different layers; Linux Kernel, Android 
Runtime Libraries, Application framework and Application layer (Shabtai et al, 2010). The 
Android Linux Kernel is based on Linux version 2.6, which implements features such as 
security, memory management, process management, network stack, and driver model 
(Android Developers, 2011). The Application layer consists of the applications that are 
installed on the device (Shabtai et al, 2010). 
Table 2.1: Security Mechanisms incorporated in Android (Shabtai, 2010). This picture is 
copied from (Shabtai, 2010) 
 
Android presents several security measures which are built in the operating system. There are 
3 different categories of mechanisms. First, it adopts 2 security mechanisms from the Linux 
operating system; the Portable Operating System Interface (POSIX) users and file access. It 
presents further mechanisms which are called environmental features and are distinguished in 
14 
 
Memory Management Unit, Type Safety and Mobile Carrier security features. It also 
implements some security mechanisms that are designed specifically for Android which are 
Application Permissions, Component encapsulation and signing applications (Shabtai et al, 
2010). The table 1 above presents the security mechanisms that can be found in Android, 
describes them and cites the protection they offer. 
Shabtai et al. (2009) presents a security analysis of Android examining many elements. 
Among the elements that were examined are application-level permissions, installing 
applications, web-browser, sql injection, connectivity and communication and many others. 
The analysis had satisfactory results. Android provided adequate level of protection when the 
device is in normal state. The components of the operating system may be modified if there is 
a vulnerability found in the kernel or in one of the libraries it uses. However, it is expected 
that any vulnerabilities will be eliminated at some point in the future. Furthermore, Android 
can be attacked easily with local host-based exploitations attempts and an attacker can send 
malware using a Web browser. Attacks through Bluetooth and using sql injections are 
difficult to occurred, since there are protection mechanisms. 
Barrera and Van Oorschot (2011) state that the applications, which are designed for Android 
are stored in “Android Market”. Applications can be downloaded from there or from the site 
of the developer of the application (Barrera and Van Oorschot, 2011). Google does not 
involve in the upload process of new applications (Barrera and Van Oorschot, 2011) thus, the 
application permissions may be altered by a malicious program and the user may not notice it 
(Shabtai et al, 2009), (Shabtai et al, 2010). 
 
2.3 Mobile Payments 
Mobile Payments are an emerging field which was designed in order to provide a wide range 
of services. Heikkinen (2009) states that mobile payments will be the “most efficient means 
of payment” (Heikkinen, 2009: 3). Mobile payments are defined by Pernet-Lubrano (2010) 
“as the act of paying for goods or services with a mobile device”. Mobile payments are 
different from other kinds of payments that can be made by using a computer, because they 
can only be done by a mobile device (Heikkinen, 2009).  
When referring to a mobile device, it does not only reflect to mobile phones, but it can refer 
to anything that it can be carried by a person (Heikkinen, 2009). However, our main concern 
when mentioning mobile payments would be about mobile phones. Moreover, other 
technologies can be integrated in a mobile device in order to make a mobile payment feasible. 
Heikkinen (2009) indicates that a mobile device could be a “carrier of various mobile 
instruments” (Heikkinen, 2009: 6) and also proposes a different definition of mobile 
payments. “Mobile payments mean the use of payment services, other than Internet banking, 
be using a mobile handset, its keyboard and display” (Heikkinen, 2009: 10). 
More and more schemes are designed in order to make payments simpler and quicker and can 
be distinguished to different categories. One distinction is presented by Pernet-Lubrano 
(2010) and it is on the location of the user and the location of the merchant. 
The categories cited by Pernet-Lubrano (2010) are the following: 
1. Remote payment over the mobile: It refers to purchases of digital or physical goods 
and services that can be made from a distance. Payments can be charged on the user?s 
bill directly or after sending an SMS message. Another way of remotely paying is by 
15 
 
entering a bank account number to a website. In order to protect the details of a bank 
account, a user can also register to a merchant?s website or have an electronic wallet 
(PayPal, Amazon Checkout).  
2. Proximity payment using the mobile terminal: Proximity payment basically refers to 
contactless payments that can take place when the mobile phone is waved or tapped 
on a receiving terminal, at a specified distance. Payments can be done for small 
amounts of money and for larger amounts as well with the requirement of entering a 
password. The information concerning the transaction is held within a secure 
component. In a different section, we explore the contactless payment in more depth. 
We analyze how feasible is the adaptation of this technology in mobile phones, 
examples of implementation and how secure it is. 
3. Receiving money over the mobile: The mobile phone can read payment cards with the 
use of an external device which can be attached to it. An example of this technology 
is a product that Apple has developed which is called “Square” and can read the 
magnetic stripe of a card.   
Heikkinen (2009) also presents a similar classification of mobile payments and also suggest 
that the time of payment should be considered. The applications could be prepaid, real-time 
or post-paid. 
Varshney (2002) distinguishes mobile commerce in payments that can be charged on the bill 
of a user or on credit account and to payments that can be made using “mobile money”. 
“Mobile money” can be stored in mobile phone using an application which reflects an 
electronic wallet.  “Mobile money” can be granted from another user over a local area 
network or via a prepaid or postpaid service (Varshney, 2002). “Mobile money” is an early 
definition that can describe the today wallet applications that are implemented in 
smartphones.  
Varshney (2002) presents the mobile scenarios with the following figure.  
 
Figure 2.1. Mobile Scenarios. This figure is copied from (Varshney, 2002). 
 
Chang et al. (2008) specifies the need of a standard that can be used for mobile commerce. 
This need is also highlighted by Linck et al. (2006) who state that the standardization and the 
16 
 
existence of specific procedures will facilitate the adaptation of users to this new technology 
and the users will find it easier to learn how to use it and trust it. 
 
2.4 Contactless Payments 
Contactless payments as presented in the previous sector belong to the category of proximity 
transactions of mobile commerce. They are a new trend in mobile phones and smartphones, 
but the introduction of contactless payments was made by the card industry. Bradford (2005) 
states that the card industry has always been searching for new ways to increase the use of 
card payments. Contactless payments can be defined as “traditional” payments that utilize 
microchips and radio frequency identification or near field communication to effect 
transactions without physical contact between the payment device and the point of sale (POS) 
terminal” (Bradford, 2005: 1). A POS is also referred as a reader.  
This technology is added in cards and purchases can be made from a small distance. The 
action indicates waving or tapping the card over a POS terminal and the spent amount is 
subtracted from the account of the user. The technology used for the secure process of 
payments is the Visa technology used for the Chip and PIN transactions (Barclays, 2011). 
They are considered to be faster than magnetic-stripe and cash payments (Bradford, 2005) 
and this is mainly because in most cases the need for entering a Personal Identification 
Number (PIN) or waiting for change is eliminated (Olsen, 2008). Olsen (2008) also reports 
other advantages that contactless payments can offer. Using contactless card for payments 
can also reduce the possibility of error when manually handling money and the risk of theft. 
The use of contactless payments focused mainly on micropayments. Micropayments refer on 
small purchases which are under the amount of £10 or £15. A significant number of people 
tend to use their payment cards for micropayments which sometimes is not possible because a 
limitation of a minimum amount spent may exist. Contactless payments aim to provide speed 
and convenience in places where this is essential (Olsen, 2008) and the user does have to 
enter a PIN (Personal Identification Number) to authorize the transaction (Pasquet, 2008). 
However, in order to provide a level of protection the user is asked to enter their Personal 
Identification Number after a certain number of transactions (Barclays, 2011). The user may 
also be asked to enter his PIN code when their purchase is referred to as macro payment 
(Pasquet, 2008). The user will have to wave their mobile phone over the POS, enter their PIN 
and then wave their mobile phone for a second time (Pasquet, 2008). Macro payments require 
authentication because the transactions regard a larger amount of money.     
The following figures represent the signs of contactless payments. The first sign indicates that 
a card is able to conduct contactless payments and the second one can be found on a POS 
terminal in retail stores that accept this kind of payment. 
  
Figure 2.2. Sign on cards. This picture is 
copied from (Barclays, 2011). 
Figure 2.3. Sign on the POS terminal. This 
picture is copied from (Barclays, 2011). 
17 
 
Through the years, there have been several efforts for the deployment of contactless 
payments by the card industry. In 2003, American Express and MasterCard presented 
ExpressPay and PayPass respectively and in 2004, Visa launched Visa Wave (Bradford, 
2005). Initially, most bank companies were reluctant to deploy this new technology 
(Bradford, 2005). After some time, different banks such as HSBC, Citibank, JPMorgan Chase 
and Key Bank have used the above products to introduce contactless technology to the public 
and different retailers have begun accepting contactless payments (Bradford, 2005). 
Furthermore, banks have thought of extending the use of this technology and adding it to 
mobile devices (Bradford, 2005). 
In UK, the first attempt for contactless cards was made by Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS) in 
2006 in association with MasterCard (Olsen, 2008). Barclays followed this initiation and in 
2007, Barclays launched the OnePulse card which contained 3 different functionalities; Visa 
Wave and Pay for micropayments, the standard Chip and PIN card for macro payments and 
the Oyster fare application (Olsen, 2008). The efforts made by major banks added a new 
perspective into the future of contactless technology. More and more retailers in UK began 
trials on contactless payments, although they were concerned that this change would be a 
financial burden (Olsen, 2008).  
Another different approach for adapting contactless technology in everyday life is the use of 
prepaid cards. Prepaid cards can have the same characteristics as a prepaid SIM card (Orsen, 
2008). This would mainly attract people who do not have bank accounts. People can top-up 
their card in the same way they do with a pay as you go SIM card and then use it as a credit 
card (Orsen, 2008). This option also provides some level of protection, because prepaid cards 
are not connected to a person?s bank account. 
Contactless technology was considered promising from its first appearance. Thoughts were 
made that the future of this technology was the integration of cards in the mobile phones with 
the development of the appropriate software (Orsen, 2008). As a result, the mobile phone 
would be responsible for conducting payments. Research also presented that different kinds 
of mobile devices, such as keys, watches and mobile phones could be used. These thoughts 
became a reality and different applications for the mobile phones that were using Near Field 
Communication protocol have been presented. 
 
3.5 Near Field Communication 
Near Field Communication (NFC) is a new protocol that was developed for contactless 
communication within a short-range. It is vastly used by the cell phone industry, because it 
merges wireless networks with the contactless card technology. It was developed in order to 
create a new generation of mobile phones presenting more capabilities than ever (Fischer, 
2009). Consequently, a single device can present the maximum level of functionality and 
Near Field Technology can be defined as a first step into context aware smart environments 
and to ubiquitous computing (Chang et al., 2009). 
Firstly, we present the characteristics of NFC. The NFC protocol was designed and 
developed by the companies Philips and Sony in 2002 in order to provide contactless 
communication (Ortiz, 2006) and the standards of the protocol can be found in ISO/IEC 
18092 (ISO, 2004). In the same year the forum of NFC was created by the two companies 
and Nokia to provide information about the new technology (NFC Forum, 2011). The 
protocol uses the standards of contactless cards as they are described in ISO/IEC 14443 
18 
 
(Madlmayr et al., 2008b).  NFC is an advancement of the Radio Frequency Identification 
(RFID) and both technologies have many similarities (Madlmayr et al., 2008b). RFID is 
going to be described in a different sector. 
In addition, NFC supports contactless communication in a distance of less than 10 
centimeters with the use of electromagnetic waves (Madlmayr et al., 2008b). Other sources 
present that the distance should be 4 centimeters or less (NFC Forum, 2011). The radio 
frequency used by NFC to produce waves is located at 13.56MHz (Ortiz, 2006). The 
communication capabilities of NFC can reach 424 kbps (ISO, 2004). 
Based on the characteristics we presented above, the NFC protocol presents some limitations 
on the distance that the two communicating devices should have between them and on the 
transfer data rate. The NFC protocol can send data within a small range and can only transfer 
certain data types (Ortiz, 2006). The following figure presents the data rate and the distance 
that NFC transfers data in comparison with other wireless technologies that are integrated 
into a mobile phone. The figure shows that the NFC technology requires the minimum 
possible distance for two devices to communicate and its data rate is one of the smallest.   
 
 
Figure 2.4. Comparison of different wireless technologies. This picture is copied from (NFC 
Forum, 2011)   
 
A NFC device can be in active or passive mode (ISO, 2004) and all the devices can use both 
of them (Chang et al., 2009). The device is active if it generates the Radio Frequency field 
(RF) from a power supply or passive if it uses the power that an active device has generated 
(Haselsteiner and Breitfu?, 2006). Ortiz (2006) states an opinion in his article that the two 
modes provide a benefit that is not possible in any other contactless technology. The 
following table presents the three different cases of communication configuration between 
two devices. 
19 
 
 
Table 2.2. Communication configuration (Haselsteiner and Breitfu?, 2006). This table is 
copied from (Haselsteiner and Breitfu?, 2006). 
 
The two different modes presented above have the appropriate role when two devices with 
the NFC technology communicate. When the device is active, it can initiate the 
communication and also accept the data sent by other devices. When the device is passive, it 
must first receive data from an active device in order to be able to send data. An active device 
can be called an initiator and a target while a passive device can only be called a target 
(Haselsteiner and Breitfu?, 2006). The communication of NFC devices can be a one-to-many 
relationship. However, the initiator should specify from which device it expects an answer 
and the other devices should ignore the sent data (Haselsteiner and Breitfu?, 2006). 
NFC can easily be integrated in any system. The most important component of a NFC system 
is the secure element. The secure element consists the essential information that is needed for 
the communication and transactions (Francis et al., 2009). An antenna exists to send and 
receive data (Ortiz, 2006) and it should be large enough to provide a reliable communication 
between the tag and the device (Edwards, 2010). The existence of the NFC controller is also 
crucial. The NFC controller handles the function of the protocol, converts the analog signal to 
digital and vice versa and has access to the secure element (Madlmayr et al., 2008b). 
Additionally, the protocol of NFC is equipped to avoid collisions in the RF field (ISO, 2004). 
An RF-level detector is implemented in order to identify if another NFC device is 
transmitting (Ortiz, 2006). A card-mode detector exists to define the type of technology that 
is going to be used (Ortiz, 2006). The architecture of NFC when added to a mobile device 
will be examined in more detail in chapter 3. 
Furthermore, NFC enabled devices have three different operating modes; peer-to-peer mode, 
reader/writer mode and tag emulation mode. These modes are described by Madlmayr et al. 
(2007) and by Madlmayr et al. (2008b): 
? Peer-to-peer Mode (Near Field Communication, NFC): This mode refers to the 
communication that can be established between two devices that are using NFC. The 
devices have a two-way communication and can exchange data with a maximum 
speed of 424 kbps. Both devices can be in active mode, but there is still the need for 
an initiator and a target (Fischer, 2009). 
? Reader/Writer Mode (Proximity Coupling Device, PCD): The device is able to initiate 
communication with a passive tag or smartcard for a certain operation (Fischer, 2009). 
The device is active and initiates the communication by generating a RF field and can 
read or modify the data of the passive tag.  
20 
 
? Tag Emulation Mode (Proximity Inductive Coupling Card, PICC): The device can 
change its mode to act as a smartcard, which is complied with the ISO 14443 standard 
in order to conduct payments or other similar actions that are included in the 
electronic wallet (Fischer, 2009). When the device is in this mode, an external reader 
cannot specify whether it is a NFC enabled device or a smartcard. This mode also 
benefits the industries, because there is no need to replace the existing technology that 
is used for contactless cards.  
NFC was integrated into mobile phones, mainly smartphones in order to provide a wide range 
of contactless services (Francis et al, 2009). Ortiz (2006) quotes the opinion by Kay Irwin 
(inCode Consultancy) that in a few years time “NFC will be a standard feature in most cell 
phones”. Android has already adapted the NFC technology for communication purposes 
(Android Developers, 2011). It also uses NFC for the Google Wallet, an application that we 
will be described below.  
Fischer (2009) characterizes a mobile phone with NFC as a magic wand, because depending 
on where the device points to, it can be interpreted to a specific function. The basic operation 
of NFC in smartphones is conducting contactless paymens. However, smartphones can be 
used for the development of a variety of applications except payments. NFC tags can be used 
to provide interoperability between different applications. The NFC forum (2011) presents 
some of the areas where the NFC technology can be deployed. Examples of areas as stated in 
the NFC Forum (2011) are access control, consumer electronics, healthcare, information 
collection and exchange and transport. Among the different facilities, NFC can be used for 
communication; mobile devices can connect to each other (Francis et al, 2009). Furthermore, 
the NFC technology can be used for configuring other wireless technologies (Bluetooth, 
WiFi) by exchanging the appropriate settings (NFC Forum, 2011). Thus, this function 
eliminates the need for manual setup (Ortiz, 2006).  
The applications that use contactless technology can be distinguished in four categories as 
stated by (Pasquet et al., 2008).  
? Touch and Go: Consumer can wave or tap the device over a POS (Point of Sale) to 
conduct a payment without the need for authorization. This type of payments is called 
micropayments. 
? Touch and Confirm: The user is asked to accept the transaction by entering a 
password. 
? Touch and Connect: This category refers to connections between two devices in order 
to exchange data. This can also be done in order to transfer money from one device to 
another. 
? Touch and Explore: The user has the ability of choosing one action between a list of 
functionalities. 
The following figure presents the possible capabilities of a mobile phone with integrated 
NFC technology. The figure shows the areas where the technology is applicable, what 
activities and services it can offer and which industries can be involved. 
21 
 
 
Figure 2.5. Possible use of mobile phones with NFC. This picture is copied from (NFC 
Forum, 2011). 
  
These services can be managed by one application on the smartphone, the mobile or 
electronic wallet.  
Mobile wallet is an application that represents an electronic version of a wallet (Shin, 2009). 
A mobile wallet includes all the information that is needed in order to conduct a mobile 
transaction. It also can store personal and essential information that can be found in a wallet 
such as credit card information, PIN codes, and details about online accounts (Shin, 2009). 
The personal data can be stored on the component which is responsible for conducting the 
contactless payment on an embedded chip which can be used for the storing of the personal 
information (Shin, 2009). The mobile wallet application emulates the functionality of a wallet 
and expands its functionality (Shin, 2009). The most challenging part of the electronic wallet 
is the combination of different payment cards and services that are available in the 
application (Fischer, 2009). The data stored in the phone should be distinguished based on the 
service they provide and they should be in different data cells. (Fischer, 2009). It is 
considered to be a revolutionary technology for the mobile commerce, because it is easy to 
use and quicker than other mobile commerce applications.  
Although the mobile wallet application can offer many new benefits, it is not widely used yet. 
Shin (2009) outlines some of the reasons that mobile wallet and contactless are not widely 
used. The reasons given are also expressed by a variety of articles. Fischer (2009) states the 
need that the electronic wallet must implemented security to provide protection against 
electronic pickpockets or loss. 
In addition to the electronic wallet, a variety of other applications were developed in order to 
ease the everyday life. As it is mentioned, in the above figure, information can be obtained 
22 
 
from a smart poster. A simple approach of this service is the addition of tags in advertising 
posters. When the user sees the advertisement, they can have access to more information 
through a website by simply waving the phone over the poster (Fischer, 2009). This approach 
can be used in different scenarios. 
Other examples of applications using the NFC are the peer-to-peer transfer of business cards 
and a phone based reader/writer application that helps the elderly (Fischer, 2009). The first 
application is used for the exchange of business cards by taping two devices together while 
the use the peer-to-peer mode (Fischer, 2009). The second application can be used to replace 
the dial or the speed-dial when calling a person (Fisher, 2009). Tags that contain the phone 
number of people can be added on photos of them and when the user desires to call them, 
they can simply tap or wave to call them (Edwards, 2010).        
Anokwa et al. (2007) address a problem that is visible in all the applications. The majority of 
NFC enabled applications is not designed based on a general interaction model. Thus, 
Anokwa et al. (2007) propose a user model so that when a mobile phone scans an item, the 
phone has all the properties and information about the scanned item. This procedure is called 
transformation. For example, the model presents all the available options that a user has when 
interacting with the poster based on its subject offering them all the information that the user 
may need.  
Most of the NFC applications that have been implemented for mobile phones are not 
designed to control. Chang et al. (2009) present a more ambitious approach; an architecture 
model towards a NFC phone driven context-aware smart environment. A NFC enabled 
mobile phone can be used in order to control the home appliances using the Generic Control 
Record Type Definition (GCRTD). The user can personalize their NFC mobile phone with 
the settings they want for the control of home appliances. 
 
2.6 Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) 
Near Field Communication derives from Radio Frequency Identification (RFID). The 
protocol of NFC was created in order to enhance the functionality of RFID. Consequently, 
they present many similarities, but also they have some differences. RFID is used for 
identification, while the main use of NFC is two-way communication (Juels, 2005). 
Radio Frequency Identification is defined as a technology whose main function is the unique 
identification of an object or a person (Juels, 2005). It is also known as an Electronic Product 
Code (EPC) tag (Juels, 2005). It is implemented with a very small microchip and an antenna. 
The microchip is used to transmit data wirelessly. The majority of the tags are passive and 
they do not have any source of power. However, when in the range of a reader, they gain 
power in order to transmit their information (Juels, 2005). The distance of the transmission 
depends on the frequency band that the reader uses (Juels, 2005). 
RFID tags were introduced in the everyday life and they can provide many possibilities for 
the future by empowering the vision of ubiquitous computing. They can be integrated in 
home appliances and are used to provide access to buildings and to public transportation 
(Juels, 2005). They are also used for performing payments and they are known as contactless 
cards (Venkataramani and Gopalan, 2007).   
Although, RFID tags are used widely there are security issues that cannot be ignored. RFID 
tags raise privacy issues. A person who uses an RFID tag sends a unique ID, which “betrays” 
23 
 
their location (Juel, 2005).  There are also other issues, such as relay and cloning attacks 
(Juel, 2005). The security issues that were described were inherited to the NFC protocol as 
well and there are many concerns about the integration of the technology in mobile phones.    
 
2.7 Wallet applications 
Throughout the years different wallet applications made their appearance. All of them have a 
common target; the implementation of a convenient tool that offers security. 
2.7.1 Osaifu-Keitai 
NTT DoCoMo, the largest cell phone provider in Japan, has introduced one of the first 
mobile wallet, Osaifu-Keitai, in 2004 which serves a wallet within the phone (Pernet-
Lubrano, 2010). Its implementation is based on the wireless smart card chip, FeliCa. FeliCa is 
a wireless smart card and was developed by Sony Corp. and Royal Philips Electronics in 
1995 and is designed for proximity transactions. The two companies were the first to 
introduce the Near Field Communication protocol as it was mentioned above (Boyd, 2005).  
DoCoMo?s wallet phone uses the FeliCa smart card as a wireless prepaid cash card. Each 
user can register for the e-wallet service and load money in the card (Boyd, 2005). The top-up 
process can be made with two different ways, either inserting money in top-up machines or 
transferring money from a bank account using their phone, after they have inserted an 
identification number to authenticate themselves (Boyd, 2005). Furthermore, the user can be 
informed about the current balance and about previous transactions, because the information 
can be visible (Boyd, 2005). The wallet phone can be used to make different kinds of 
transactions, such as payments, identification and can also be used as a ticket or a boarding 
pass. For these transactions, it is necessary a FeliCa reader (Boyd, 2005).  
The figure below summarizes the services the Osaifu-Keitai provides. The Osaifu-Keitai can 
replace a wallet, because all the information that can be found in a wallet is stored in the 
mobile device and it can also be used to conduct different activities.   
 
Figure 2.6. Services available on Osaifu-Keitai. This picture is copies from (NTT DOCOMO 
Inc., 2011). 
In order to provide certain levels of security the DoCoMo?s wallet phones have adapted 
certain mechanisms (Boyd, 2005). The data of the application needed for the proximity 
transactions are stored in the files separated than the other files of the phone. During the 
communication between the smart card and the reader/writer, there is a mutual authentication 
which is based on an encryption scheme with random generated numbers (Boyd, 2005). 
Before any transaction, the user has the option of entering a personal identification number 
(PIN) in order to authenticate the transaction (Boyd, 2005). In the case that the mobile phone 
is lost, the user can lock it by informing the customer support of DoCoMo (Boyd, 2005).  
24 
 
DoCoMo?s wallet phone has become an example for the design and deployment of other 
wallet phones (Shin, 2009). After its appearance other companies in Japan were interested in 
developing similar applications using the FeliCa smart card (Boyd, 2005). 
 
2.7.2 Google Wallet 
 
Figure 2.7. Sprint Nexus S 4G (Google, 2011) 
In May 2011, Google released its wallet, the Google Wallet. The Google Wallet is an 
application that can be implemented on Sprint Nexus S 4G, but Google is ambitious and 
hopes that other phones will soon adapt this new technology (Google, 2011). With NFC 
integrated, a user can tap its phone to a POS (point of sale) to pay for buying goods (Google, 
2011). Two different cards are supported which can be used in order to perform payments; 
Citi® MasterCard® credit cards and the Google Prepaid Card (Google, 2011). The Google 
Prepaid Card is a virtual card that can be topped up with any of the user?s bank account and 
the user will not be charged with any fees (Google, 2011). The Google Prepaid Card was 
created and is supported by MasterCard® and Money Network® (Google, 2011). If a user 
has a Citi® MasterCard®, they can link their account with the card on the phone be entering 
their account information (Google, 2011). The details of the account are then store in the 
secure element for future purchases (Google, 2011). 
Google (2011) indicates that the security mechanisms that are implemented in Google Wallet 
ensure safe payments. The Google Wallet requires the setup of a PIN (Personal Identification 
Number) which will be entered before each purchase (Google, 2011). This feature is not 
applicable in other NFC payment schemes. Usually, the payments are made without requiring 
the insertion of a PIN. Furthermore, the bank account information that is stored in the secure 
element is protected with encryption (Google, 2011). The secure element is integrated as a 
separate component and only certain applications are able to access it (Google, 2011). During 
the payment process, the essential information is secure with the encryption technology that 
MasterCard PayPass provides (Google, 2011). 
 
 
 
25 
 
2.8 Security Concerns 
Smartphones are more vulnerable to attacks than computers. This is based on the fact that 
smartphones are open, networked devices that can be programmed (Shabtai et al., 2009). In 
addition, the attackers are more experienced, because they have gained knowledge using the 
computer and the Internet. They already know the vulnerabilities that may exist in a device, 
so it is easier for them to write malicious code. As it is mentioned by Shabtai et al. (2009), 
„two years of smartphone evolution are equivalent to twenty years of work in computer 
viruses? (Shabtai et al., 2009: 1). 
Furthermore, users are making the mistake of trusting the security that a smartphone may 
have and as a result, they store more and more personal data in them (Chen and Peikari, 
2008). The first years, smartphones were becoming popular there were not implemented 
many security mechanisms and the first smartphones had many holes and vulnerabilities. 
(Leavitt, 2005), (Chen and Peikari, 2008). Protection mechanisms like intrusion detection 
tools and antivirus programs are not present in smartphones because of their limited 
processing capabilities. (Chen and Peikari, 2008). Specifically, smartphones did not have as a 
primary goal the protection. 
Smartphones are an attractive target for attackers. One of the main reasons is the existence of 
vulnerabilities. Moreover, smartphones are expanding around the world rapidly so the 
damage can be bigger and they contain a large amount of essential information (Shabtai et al., 
2009). Smartphones are also well connected to different types of networks. They have 
internet access through wireless networks and can also use Personal networking using 
Bluetooth or ad-hoc networks (Chen and Peikari, 2008).  
Although, many families of malware have been reported in the different operating systems of 
smartphones (Leavitt, 2005), the percentage of infected devices has been limited over the past 
years due to the fact that the overall number of smartphones was limited (Shabtai et al, 2009). 
Other reasons that malware was not a severe threat for smartphones is because there are a 
variety of mobile platforms and an attacker should create different malicious code for each 
one of them (Leavitt, 2005).  Furthermore, smartphones are not continuously connected to the 
internet in order to save power, so the spreading procedure is delayed and Bluetooth attacks 
should happen in short range and this poses some restrinctions (Chen and Peikari, 2008). 
However, it is estimated that until 2013, the number of smartphones will be 5 times bigger 
(Shabtai et al, 2009). 
Smartphones consist of a large amount of personal data because of extensive use. This 
increases the possibility that a third person has unauthorized access to private data. This is 
considered a severe compromise of privacy (Tomlinson et al, 2010).   
Some applications require access to data that are considered sensitive. Sensitive data can be 
defined as the data that may reveal personal information about the user such as their location, 
the applications they use, data they exchange with other people etc (Tomlinson et al, 2010). 
This also can be considered as a violation of privacy. 
The next section presents a definition of malicious software. 
 
 
 
26 
 
2.8.1 Malicious Software 
When we are referring to malicious software or malware, we mean one the three categories, 
virus, worm, Trojan. These three categories have many characteristics in common and their 
distinction is based on some details.  
A virus can be defined as „a piece of software code (set of instructions but not a complete 
program) attached to a normal program or file?(Chen and Peikari, 2008 : 2). A virus is 
dependable on the program that is attached to and during the execution it takes the control 
and makes copies of itself to programs and files in the operating system. 
A worm is an independent program. It propagates through the network and makes copies of 
itself on computers with vulnerabilities (Chen and Peikari, 2008).   
A Trojan horse is presented as a legitimate program, but has a malicious function. Trojan 
horses are used to retrieve essential data such as passwords or are used to install other 
malicious programs (Chen and Peikari, 2008). 
There are other types of malicious programs that have hidden functions, such as bots and 
spyware. „Bots are covertly installed software that secretly listen for remote commands, 
usually sent through Internet relay chat (IRC) channels, and execute them on compromised 
computers.? (Chen and Peikari, 2008 : 2).  
„Spyware collects personal user information from a victim computer and transmits the data 
across the network, often for advertising purposes but possibly for data theft.? (Chen and 
Peikari, 2008 : 2). 
The image below presents the taxonomy of malicious software and the table presents the 
basic characteristics of a virus, a worm and a Trojan horse. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2.8. Malicious Software Taxonomy. This picture is copied from (Chen and Peikari, 
2008) 
27 
 
 
 Table 2.3.Malicious Software Taxonomy. This picture is copied from (Schmidt and 
Albayrak, 2008). 
Malicious programs can cause a lot of problems to a smartphone. First, they can harm the 
device by making it unusable. They can steal personal and essential information, they can 
modify data and can charge the user by sending unwanted phone calls and messages (Shabtai 
et al., 2009). The majority of the malware that was created targeted the Symbian OS (Töyssy 
and Helenius, 2006). 
 
In addition to these fears, the new NFC technology presents more challenges. Procedures that 
communicate with other entities require a high level of security in order to protect the 
essential information that is stored in a mobile device (Fischer, 2009). Even, the simplest 
services that are not involved with payments should provide security measures (Fischer, 
2009). Furthermore,  
 
2.9 Consumer Perspective 
The widespread use of contactless payments conducted by payment cards and mobile phones 
depends on the acceptance of users. The most important obstacle that may delay the 
distribution of this technology is security issues (Smart Card Alliance, 2006). 
A survey that is presented by Smart Card Alliance (2006) shows that from the percentage of 
people that used contactless payments, the majority believes that it is easy to use and fast. 
Smart Card Alliance (2006) denotes that a challenge is posed by consumers who are not 
familiar with this new technology. Users do not feel comfortable using this new technology, 
because they are not informed about how it works and is not part of everyday life (Ortiz, 
2006). Education and experience will eliminate any hesitations about contactless payments 
(Smart Card Alliance, 2006). Edwards (2010) presents an opinion that the users will accept 
contactless technology, after they become comfortable with mobile payments. Furthermore, 
the results from the survey by Smart Card Alliance (2006) show that a significant proportion 
of users wants to use this technology, because contactless payments are easy to use and there 
is the possibility of carrying fewer items.  
Although this new technology has its advantages, it has also many challenges that should be 
addressed (Pernet-Lubrano, 2010). There are fears that attackers will have a new mean to use 
for their own benefit (Francis et al, 2009). People are concerned about the security and 
28 
 
privacy issues of the NFC technology. Many different approaches have been presented in 
order to specify the security mechanisms that should be integrated in a mobile payment 
scheme.  
Linck et al (2006) have presented how users perceive security and what are their concerns. 
This research can be used as a guideline to use the appropriate security mechanisms, so users 
can trust mobile payments.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
29 
 
3. Risk Assessment 
 
3.1 Overview 
In this chapter we focus on assessing the NFC functionality when it is integrated into a 
mobile phone/ smartphone. The main objection is to identify the vulnerabilities risks when 
using the mobile phone/smartphone to make a contactless payment and provide some 
possible solutions in order to enhance the security provided by the NFC protocol and 
eliminate possible threats. An improved version of the protocol will gain the trust of users 
and they will fill more comfortable using this technology to conduct their payments. 
As it was mentioned on the previous chapter, NFC derives from RFID, which over the years 
has presented a number of security issues. Thus, the examination of whether those security 
issues were inherited in the NFC protocol is essential. Many articles and the NFC Forum 
declare that the NFC protocol has inherent security. The opinion is expressed based on the 
fact that the communication between two devices is done in a short-range distance. However, 
this does not necessarily mean that the NFC protocol is completely safe and further 
investigations are needed.  
The acknowledgment of the vulnerabilities and risks is done through a quantitative risk 
assessment. First, we analyze the methodology used in order to observe how the protocol 
works and in order to characterize the potential risks. Furthermore, we present the 
architecture model of mobile device with NFC and through some use case scenarios we 
comprehend the entities and functions that are involved. We also provide information about 
threats that have been identified by researchers. At the end of the chapter, we present the 
possible risks that can occur to each different mobile operating system based on the 
implemented security mechanisms. Solutions are proposed in Chapter 4.  
 
3.2 Methodology 
The methodology used in order to evaluate the NFC protocol when it is used to conduct 
contactless payments with a mobile phone / smartphone is called Quantitative Risk 
Assessment (QRA). This type of analysis is chosen in order to identify the risks that could 
cause tremendous consequences in the system and the security mechanisms that should be 
applied to avoid them (Meritt, 2011). The objective of QRA is to present which of the risks 
are more dangerous and should be addressed first in order to eliminate them (Croker, 2003). 
The risks are assigned with values which represent their significance, from urgent to non-
important (Croker, 2003).  
A quantitative risk analysis can offer many advantages. It is a tool that is used for 
management in the industry and the analysis is objective (Tan, 2002). The analysis is made 
based on the needs of the industry, which can be declared and the recommended solutions 
reflect the recognized risks (Tan, 2002). Finally, the proposed solutions consider the cost and 
the benefits that a company will have (Tan, 2002). 
To begin with, we present the definitions of risk and threat. A risk is called something that 
may harm or reduce the performance of a computational system. A threat can occur in a 
system and present a risk (Meritt, 2011).  
30 
 
 
The following points present the different stages of a Quantitative Risk Assessment as they 
are described by Croker (2003) and Tan (2002) 
? Definition of the context. The components and the operational area of the concept 
should be presented. 
? Identification of the risks: The risks should be identified and the conditions that 
contribute to their appearance should be presented. 
? Determination of the severity of a risk. What are the consequences of each risk to the 
system? – Consequence (C). 
? Specification of how frequent each risk can appear - Likelihood (L). 
? Specification of how possible is the exposure of the system to each risk – Exposure 
(E).  
? Classification of risks: Risk = C x L x E 
? Identify the most urgent risks which have the highest value based on the above 
calculation. 
? The most dangerous risks are analyzed. 
? Solutions are proposed to address and eliminate the identified risks. 
 
The following figure presents schematically the above procedure which is an alteration of the 
figure presented by Crocker (2003). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.1. Quantitative Risk Assessment 
Define the context 
Identify Risks 
Analyze Risks 
Consequence Likelihood Exposure 
Risk = C x L x E 
Prioritize the risks 
Analyze urgent risks 
Propose Solutions 
31 
 
3.3 Quantitative Risk Assessment 
This section presents the Quantitative Risk Assessment that was made in order to identify the 
risks that may appear by using the NFC technology and which of these risks are the most 
crucial and need immediate actions.  
 
3.3.1 Definition of Context 
The first step of Quantitative Risk Assessment is the definition of the context. Thus, all the 
entities that participate in the technology and the processes that are needed must be defined. 
The most important and obvious entity that is needed, so that the protocol can work is the 
mobile phone / smartphone.   
We show how a representative architecture model of a NFC enabled mobile phone works and 
then we proceed with the possible scenarios that occur when conducting payments.  
3.3.1.1 Architecture Model 
The following figures present the architecture model of a mobile phone / handset when it is 
integrated with the NFC technology. 
 
Figure 3.2. Architecture model of a NFC enabled mobile phone. This picture is copied from 
(Madlmayr et al., 2008b) 
 
32 
 
 
Figure 3.3. Architecture model of a NFC enabled mobile phone with operational modes when 
interacting with other devices. This picture is copied from (Francis et al., 2009). 
The above pictures show the components that were described in the second chapter. 
However, in this section we will present them with more detail emphasizing the importance 
of the secure element. 
The secure element is the most important component of the infrastructure (Francis et al., 
2009). Choudhary and Risikko () define the secure element as “a dynamic environment, 
where applications are downloaded, personalized, managed and removed independent of each 
other with varying life cycles” (Choudhary and Risikko, :3). It consists all the essential 
information that is used for the transactions and the communication (Francis et al., 2009).  
The content of the secure element can be modified by the appropriate applications installed 
on the mobile phone / smartphone (Madlmayr et al., 2008a). The applications are executed on 
the host controller which is responsible for the communication of the handset with the secure 
element (Madlmayr et al., 2008a). The host controller and the NFC controller have access to 
the data stored in the secure element. The NFC controller has access to data in the secure 
element that are going to be sent through an NFC communication (Madlmayr et al., 2008b). 
Additionally, the NFC controller is responsible for the conversion of the analog signal to 
digital and vice versa (Madlmayr et al., 2008b).  
Based on the three modes, which a device can have and which were presented in chapter 2, a 
NFC enabled device can act as a contactless card and as Reader (Francis et al., 2009). When 
the device is in any of the three modes, the secure element communicates with the application 
layer through the host controller and with an external device with NFC controller (Francis et 
al., 2009). If the device acts as contactless card, it has a unique ID as it is indicated by the 
ISO 14443 (Madlmayr et al., 2008a) and can act as a passive contactless token (Francis et al., 
2009). The ID is 4, 7 or 10 bytes long (Madlmayr et al., 2008a). This ID is used for 
identification in order to avoid collision issues during the process of contactless reading 
(Madlmayr et al., 2008a).  
During the case that the device acts as a Reader, the device can communicate with other 
devices using JSR 257 API (Application Programming Interface) and the Host Controller. An 
example is that the device can initiate a communication with a smart object (NFC Data 
Exchange Format). (Francis et al, 2009).   
33 
 
The implementation of the secure element can be made using different architectures 
(Madlmayr et al., 2007). There are 3 major categories stated by Choudhary and Risikko (): 
? Removable Hardware: 
o SIM card: The SIM card can be implemented easily and it is cost efficient 
(Madlmayr et al., 2007). Every cell phone needs a SIM card to make phone 
calls, thus it is easy to use it as a secure element as well (Madlmayr et al., 
2007). 
o Advanced secure USB (Choudhary and Risikko, ). 
o Secure Memory Card: It combines the functionalities of a smartcard and a 
memory card (Choudhary and Risikko, ). It can store a large amount of 
information and can remain to its position from the beginning (Choudhary and 
Risikko, ). The data stored are independently from other data on the device. 
o Universal Integrated Circuit Card (UICC): It has the properties of a smartcard 
and many applications can be stored on it Reveilhac and Pasquet, 2009). 
? Non-Removable Hardware: An embedded chip or a baseband processor can be used 
(Reveilhac and Pasquet, 2009). 
o Baseband processor: The addition of extra hardware is not necessary. The 
secure element is part of the memory of the baseband (Reveilhac and Pasquet, 
2009). 
o Embedded chip: A smartcard is added in the device and cannot be removed. 
The level of security provided is the one supported by the smartcard 
(Reveilhac and Pasquet, 2009). After purchase, the user should personalized it 
(Choudhary and Risikko, ). 
? Software: Software secure elements are considered in many areas (Choudhary and 
Risikko, ).   
Madlmayr et al. (2007) state that the cost of using an embedded secure element is less than a 
removable one. However, an embedded chip requires more attention. Although, there are 
many options, there is not a standardization about the architecture that it should be used 
(Reveilhac and Pasquet, 2009). 
 
3.3.1.2 Scenarios 
There are different scenarios when conducting a contactless payment and they can be divided 
based on their characteristics. Madlmayr et al. (2008b) proposes the following classification 
for mobile payment: 
? Amount of money spent: micropayment or macro payment 
? Point of Sale: Local or remote payment 
? Clearing and Settlement: prepaid, post-paid, in-time paid 
? Operation method: online or offline 
In the scenarios described below we only use three of the above characteristics. All the 
payments are made locally. Because the NFC technology is a new technology for performing 
payments, it is not used by mobile phones or smartphones. All the scenarios described are 
results from various researches.  
34 
 
Scenario 1: 
The first scenario is based on an idea proposed by Madlmayr et al. (2008b) for 
micropayments. The scenario presents a prepaid payment system which implements 3 
different processes; top-up process, payment process and clearing and settlement. 
A wallet application is needed to intervene between the secure element and the user and 
between the secure element and the server during the top up process. The wallet application 
informs the user about the available money on the phone and holds information about 
previous transactions. During the payment and top-up process, the wallet application updates 
the amount of money stored in the SVA (stored value amount), which is located in the secure 
element. 
The following figure summarizes the different processes of the proposed payment system that 
are explained below. 
 
Figure 3. . Processes of the payment system. This picture is copied from (Madlmayr et al., 
2008b) 
? Top-up Process: The top-up process is made Over-The-Air within seconds. This 
procedure is called over the air because it can be made anywhere and at anytime. 
The user initiates the process by selecting the appropriate option from the wallet 
application. Then, the wallet application requests the amount of money from the SVA. 
The user is informed about the available balance and they select the amount to be 
added. The wallet application creates an IP connection with the transaction server and 
sends the request of the user. The transaction server matches the user?s mobile 
subscriber ISDN number with the IP address of the received package. The transaction 
server checks the account balance of the user and a positive answer is sent if the 
transaction can be made. The wallet application receives the packet and updates the 
SVA and the information are visible to the user. This process can be completed in 10 
seconds. 
35 
 
? Payment Process: During the payment process the device should be in tag emulation 
mode. The user waves the device at a POS and the wallet application deducts the due 
amount from the SVA in some milliseconds. 
? Clearing and Settlement Process: The transaction server can be informed with various 
ways. If the terminal operates online, the transaction server is informed immediately. 
If the terminal operates offline, it receives data after a predefined period of time. The 
transaction is cleared after some time and the money are received by the merchant. 
Scenario 2:  
A similar scenario can be made with in-time paid or post-paid cards. The top-up process is 
not needed and the clearing and settlement process of the above scenario can be used. 
The difference is apparent during the payment process. The secure element contains all the 
information about the user?s account. During the payment process, the device must be in tag 
emulation mode. The user waves the device at a POS and the wallet application initiates an IP 
connection with the transaction server and sends the request of the user. The transaction 
server matches the user?s mobile subscriber ISDN number with the IP address of the received 
package. The transaction server checks the account balance of the user, it deducts the 
specified amount from their account and the transaction is completed. The wallet application 
can then be informed if the transaction was successful. The wallet application may also 
contain the available balance of the user?s account and can inform them. 
Scenario 3: 
Pasquet et al. (2008) proposes a scenario that was used in a trial in France and it belongs to 
the category Touch and Confirm application. This scenario presents the actions that are 
requested by the user. We assume that the processes running at lower layers are the same 
with the above scenarios, but the difference is that the user is asked to enter a PIN code.  
The user wants to make a purchase. The application that regards the payment can be chosen 
manually by the user or automatically. If the payment application it chosen manually, the user 
must select the appropriate application from a list. If it is selected automatically, the user 
waves the mobile phone at the POS and the technology recognizes the application that is 
needed for the payment. The application asks the user to enter their PIN code and the input is 
validated. If the PIN code is correct, the user is asked to wave the handset at the POS and the 
transaction is performed. Finally, the user is informed by a message that his transaction has 
been completed.  
Scenario 4: 
This scenario is presented by Haselsteiner and Breitfu? (2006). Two NFC devices can be 
used in order to exchange data. However, because of the low bandwidth only certain data 
types can be transferred (Ortiz, 2006). Thus, two devices cannot exchange music or video 
files, but these files can be exchanged using different technologies such as Bluetooth or WiFi. 
The NFC technology can be used, so the devices will exchange the settings in order to initiate 
the communication with the other technologies. 
 
The above scenarios presented the components of communication and contactless payments 
and the processes that can be executed. We can summarize them in a small list below: 
36 
 
? Mobile phone integrated with NFC technology 
? Secure element  
? Contactless card properties / Payment Process 
? Payment – Top-up processes 
? Communication between 2 devices  
In the next section, the risks that can threaten the above list are presented and explained. 
 
3.3.2 Identify and Analyze the Risks 
For each of the above points, we present the possible threats and risks. We also investigate if 
each risk is applicable in the Operating systems of smartphones that were described in 
chapter 2 based on the security mechanisms they use. 
Hardware   
To begin with we present one of the simplest threats. Because of the small size of the mobile 
phone, a mobile phone or a smartphone can be lost or stolen easily. As a result, all the data 
that are stored in the mobile phone / smartphone can be read by unauthorized people. 
Attackers can also have access to the secure element which contains information about bank 
accounts. Moreover, because the secure element may belong in the category of removable 
hardware it can be also lost or stolen. Other device may be able to read the contents stored on 
it. 
The leakage of information of information can create some privacy issues as well. The secure 
element contains information about previous payment transactions. If an unauthorized person 
has access to this data, they can find information about the owner of the mobile device and 
about their location.    
Another hardware component that is threatened and many attacks have been implemented is 
the unique ID of the contactless tag based on ISO14443 (Madlmayr et al., 2008a). This 
unique ID is used for identification and to avoid collisions, as it was mentioned in a previous 
chapter (Jara et al., 2010). The unique ID when it is transmitted it does not use an encryption 
algorithm and the reading device is not asked to authenticate itself (Madlmayr et al., 2008a). 
Thus, this situation encapsulates many risks.  
There is the risk that the ID is leaked and then it can be used by another card which can lead 
to cloning (Jara et al, 2010). Moreover, there are privacy violations. Each ID is unique, so 
when it is leaked, the location of person is leaked as well. 
 
Application Layer 
Each mobile phone / smartphone has many applications installed on its platform. Some of 
them are applications developed by third parties. Although, most operating systems do not 
allow applications to run outside their directory, there are many ways to bypass these 
restrictions (Schroder et al,.2011). These applications can have access to the secure element. 
There are also other applications in the secure element that support the functionality of NFC 
(Madlmayr et al., 2008a). If other applications have access on them there is the risk of data 
modification, data insertion and there are issues that concern the privacy of the user as well.   
37 
 
Furthermore, third-party applications may consist malware. Many Operating Systems do not 
have a strict policy about the signing of third-party applications and the user must decide if 
they want to install the application or not. If an application consists of a Trojan horse then 
information from the secure element can be leaked to attackers and they can use it in order to 
impersonate the legitimate user. The existence of malware on a handset poses many other 
threats. Applications may be executed without out the knowledge of the user and they can 
withhold the resources of the system. Threats are also present for the Host controller and the 
NFC controller. If they are modified then the NFC technology cannot work properly 
(Madlmayr et al., 2008a). “Processes initialized by the NFC controller that are executed on 
the Host controller can be blocked, modified or eavesdropped” (Madlmayr et al., 2008a 
:645). This can also happen to the NFC controller (Madlmayr et al., 2008a). Finally, a user 
may modify the properties of NFC or Host controller and can cause problems to the 
technology. 
 
Contactless card properties / Payment Process 
During the payment process, the mobile phone is turned on the tag emulation mode. This 
mode refers to contactless cards of the ISO 14443. This technology refers to RFID tags, 
which as it was mentioned above have many security issues. ISO 18092 and ISO 14443 do 
not implement any security for the contactless communication (Madlmayr et al., 2008a). 
Thus, the vulnerabilities, which were recognised in contactless cards, have been transferred to 
the NFC protocol. 
The attacks can lead to information leakage, cloning, impersonating and to privacy violations. 
Moreover, some attacks can charge the account of a user with purchases that they have not 
committed. The possible attacks are presented below: 
? Eavesdropping: Without any encryption schemes, an attacker can collect the data 
that are sent by the tag during a transaction (Jara, 2010). 
? Spoofing Attack: The data that are stored in the tag can be duplicated and can be 
used to another reader (Jara, 2010). 
? Cloning Attack: It is similar with spoofing attack, but with the difference that the 
duplicated data are store in another tag (Madlmayr et al., 2008a). Francis et al. 
(2009) presents a cloning attack can be done very easily with the use of another 
NFC enabled mobile phone and with the appropriate software. After the attack, the 
new contactless card is considered legitimate. 
? Relay Attack: Most relay attacks focus on ISO 14443. In relay attacks the attacker 
retransmits the data send by the token and the reader in the time of the transaction 
(Hancke, 2009).   
 
Payment / Top – up processes 
In this section, we refer to the procedures that need an internet connection in order to 
communicate with a server. Other procedures involved are analyzed in other sections. 
During the internet connection between the mobile phone / smartphone and the back-end 
server, there are fears of possible threats and attacks. In the network where the connection is 
made, there is the possibility that an attacker exists. If the information is sent without any 
38 
 
protection, attacks such as Data Modification, Data Insertion, Data Corruption and Man-in-
the-Middle attack and Eavesdropping can be easily created. 
These attacks are crucial because the attacker modifies data causing several problems and 
essential information concerning account details is leaked. This information can be used by 
the attacker in order to conduct payments using the user?s account. Furthermore, the attacker 
can learn personal details about the user, which is a privacy breach.      
 
Communication between two devices 
There is a variety of attacks that can be done when two devices communicate with each other. 
Haselsteiner and Breitfu? (2006) present some of the possible attacks. 
? Eavesdropping: The NFC protocol requires RF field in order for two devices to be 
able to communicate. An attacker can also receive the signals with the appropriate 
knowledge. The communication must be made in a small range distance, which is 
usually 4 cm. However, based on certain factors an attacker can listen to the 
communication from a certain distance. A combination of some parameters is 
sufficient for an attacker to eavesdrop. Some parameters are the attacker?s antenna, 
the attacker?s receiver and in what mode does the device transmits data. If the sender 
is in active mode then the distance is bigger at about 10m, but if the sender is in a 
passive mode, then the distance is reduced to about 1m. During eavesdropping, 
information can be leaked to the attacker. 
? Data Corruption: This attack can also act as a Denial of Service, because the attacker 
cannot modify the sent data. However, if they are aware of the modulation and the 
coding used then the attacker can send valid packets of data. 
? Data Modification: This attack is depended on the amplitude of modulation. The NFC 
protocol uses different coding schemes based on the value of baudrate. If the baudrate 
of an active is 106kBaud then the modified Miller coding scheme is used with 100% 
modulation. If the baudrate is greater, then the Manchester coding is used and the 
modulation is 10%. If the device is passive, then the Manchester coding is used. This 
information can be found on the ISO18092 (ISO, 2004).  
The data modification can only be applied in certain bits of the modified Miller 
coding. If the Manchester coding scheme is used, then the attack can be applied for all 
bits. The attacker sends a signal, which must overlap the original signal and the 
decoder will decode the opposite value of the bit that was sent. The modification of 
data can lead to tremendous consequences.  
?  Data Insertion: Data insertion attack can be accomplished only if the response time 
for the answering device is long enough for the attacker to insert their data. The 
attacker must transmit the data before the response begins transmitting, otherwise the 
two messages will be conflicted. 
? Relay Attack: (Francis et al., 2010) have shown that a peer-to-peer relay attack is 
possible between two devices that communicate with NFC technology. An attacker 
can create and introduce proxies. During the communication of two mobile phones, 
the proxies can interact between them using a Bluetooth connection. Mobile phone A 
believes that it receives messages from Proxy B and mobile phone B believes that it 
39 
 
communicates with Proxy A. However, the messages are sent from phone A and 
phone B. The proxy phones are only involved in order to relay the messages. 
 
The following table summarizes the risks that were identified in this section. It presents the 
risks that can appear when certain threats are present. It also shows the consequences of each 
risk. Each threat has number indicating the possibility of the threat to appear and each 
consequence an number indicating the severity of the consequence. 
 
Risk Threat Consequence 
Information Leakage 1. Stolen or lost mobile phone 
(5%) 
2. Stolen or lost secure element 
(removable) (5%) 
3. Unauthorized or unsigned 
applications have access to 
secure element (30%) 
4. Malware – Trojan horse (15%) 
5. Eavesdropping (20%) 
6. Man-in-the-Middle Attack 
(15%) 
 
 
1. Privacy Violations (8) 
2. An adversary can use the 
data for their own benefit 
– Impersonating (8) 
 
Leakage of ID 1. Eavesdropping (20%) 1. Privacy Violations (8) 
2. Clone creation (7) 
 
Stored Data are 
modified 
1. Malware (15%) 
2. Data Modification (20%) 
3. Data Insertion (20%) 
 
1. Malfunction of the  
protocol (6)  
2. Inconsistency (7) 
Host or NFC controller 
compromised 
1. Malware (15%) 
2. Mistake by the user (5%) 
 
1. Malfunction of the 
protocol (6) 
Applications run without 
the user knowledge 
1. Malware (15%) 1. System resources are 
withheld (5) 
 
RFID tag information 
leaked 
1. Eavesdropping (20%) 
2. Cloning Attack (20%) 
3. Spoofing Attack (20%) 
4. Relay Attack (20%) 
1. Clone creation (7) 
2. Overcharged account (8) 
3. Privacy Violations (8) 
 
Table 3.1 Risk Identification 
 
 
 
40 
 
3.4 Classification of risk 
In this section the risk will be classified. The above table will be used in order to assign 
values to consequence, likelihood and exposure.  
The values of each element are: 
? Consequence Range: 1 – 10 with 1 indicating not urgent and 10 urgent 
 The average is taken from the assigned values in the table. 
? Likelihood Range: 0 – 100% 
The percentage is summed.  
? Exposure Range: 0 – 100% 
In order to estimate the exposure factor we can use some of the questions as they were 
presented by Tan (2002): 
1. Does the system under attack have any redundancies/ backups/copies? 
Subtract 30% if the answer is YES 
2. Is the attack from outside? 
Subtract 15% if the answer is YES 
Subtract 15% if the answer is NO 
Subtract 10% if the answer is both YES and NO 
3. What is the likelihood that the attack will go undetected in time for a full 
recovery? 
Subtract 10% if the probability of being undetected is less than 20% 
Subtract 30% if the probability of being undetected is less than 10% 
4.  How soon can a countermeasure be implemented in time if at all? 
Subtract 30% if the countermeasure can be implemented within ? hour 
Subtract 20% if the countermeasure can be implemented within 1 hour 
Subtract 10% if the countermeasure can be implemented within 2 hours 
 
Risk C L E R 
Information Leakage 90% 8 70% 5.04 
Leakage of ID 20% 7.5 65% 0.975 
Stored Data are modified 55% 6.5 50% 1.7875 
Host or NFC controller compromised 20% 6 45% 0.54 
Applications run without the user knowledge 15% 5 65% 0.4875 
RFID tag information leaked 80% 7.66 55% 3.3704 
Table 3.2. Risk Classification 
 
The above table classified the threats and presents the most urgent ones. It is obvious that the 
most urgent risk is the information leakage with a risk value 5.04 and the least urgent risk is 
the compromise of the Host or the NFC controller. 
The following table is ordered in order to examine the risks and their significance more 
closely. 
41 
 
Risk C L E R 
Information Leakage 90% 8 70% 5.04 
RFID tag information leaked 80% 7.66 55% 3.3704 
Stored Data are modified 55% 6.5 50% 1.7875 
Leakage of ID 20% 7.5 65% 0.975 
Host or NFC controller compromised 20% 6 45% 0.54 
Applications run without the user knowledge 15% 5 65% 0.4875 
Table 3.3. Ordered Risks 
The risks with high values presented a large percentage of likelihood and they are more likely 
to happen. The leakage of information for example, is a major risk that was presented in all of 
our scenarios. Different threats can lead to this result and the consequences are considered 
serious. An adversary has access to essential data that may represent bank accounts. As a 
result, they can use this information to impersonate the user and perform payments. 
Furthermore, the privacy of the user is violated. An adversary can learn more about the 
personal life of the user.  
The information from the RFID tag can also be leaked to a third party. This will have the 
same consequences as the information leakage. An adversary can use the retrieved 
information to create a clone contactless card, which can be used for payments. Moreover, if 
the stored data are modified, the user then will not know the correct balance of their account 
or they want be able to use their phone to make contactless payments. 
The other risks that were presented are not insignificant and solutions should be found as 
well. However, they cannot be classified as urgent, because there is a small possibility of 
appearance and their results are not tremendous.    
 
 
  
42 
 
4. Results & Solutions 
 
4.1 Overview 
The previous chapter presented the context of the NFC protocol when it is integrated into a 
mobile device / smartphone. This risk analysis targeted mobile payments and presented the 
risks that may appear. The risks were also valuated to discover which of them require 
immediate solutions in order to avoid tremendous consequences. 
In this chapter we continue with the last step of our risk assessment. We propose some 
indicative solutions in order to ensure that contactless payments with NFC and peer-to-peer 
communication can be performed without risks. Furthermore, we evaluate how feasible is the 
implementation of each measure and the alternatives solutions that should be considered. For 
each of the identified risks, there is a list of solutions.  
 
4.2 Security Objectives 
The security measures that are adapted should satisfy certain objectives. The security 
objectives can be found on the table below. 
 
Table 4.1. Security Objectives. This table is copied form (Linck et al., 2006) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
43 
 
4.3 Encryption Schemes 
In this section we present briefly some of the cryptographic schemes that are used for 
confidentiality. Digital Signatures are used for integrity or non-repudiation, hash functions 
for authentication and digital certificates for authorization (Linck et al., 2006). 
Cryptographic schemes are distinguished in symmetric and asymmetric schemes.  
Asymmetric Schemes: A message can be encrypted using the public key but it can only be 
decrypted by the entity that holds the secret key. 
? Diffie-Hellman Key exchange: It is the one of the first public-key algorithms. Two 
entities can exchange a key securely, which will be used for the encryption of 
messages. The algorithm uses computing discrete logarithms (Stallings, 2005: 298). 
However, it is not robust against the man-in-the-middle attack (Stallings, 2005: 298). 
? RSA: “The RSA scheme is a block cipher in which the plaintext and ciphertext are 
integers between 0 and n for some n. A typical size for n is 1024 bits,n is lesss than 
21024.” (Stallings, 2005: 268). 
Symmetric Schemes: The two entities share a secret key and only the two entities know it. 
The data is exchange using that secret key for encryption and decryption. An asymmetric 
scheme should be used for the exchange of the secret key (Jara et al., 2010). 
? AES: A cipher whose block length and key length can be specified to be 128, 192, or 
256 bits (Stallings, 2005: 140). It was designed to replace the DES algorithm.  
? Triple DES: The Triple DES with 3 keys is more secure than the other versions of 
DES algorithm (Stallings, 2005: 180). The DES algorithm is described: “Data are 
encrypted in 64-bit blocks using a 56-bit key. The algorithm transforms 64-bit input in 
a series of steps into a 64-bit output. The same steps, with the same key, are used to 
reverse the encryption.” (Stallings, 2005: 72). 
Hash Functions: Hash functions are used for the authentication of a message. A hash value h 
is generated with the use of a function H, which is applied on the message. They do not 
implement security, so the hash value must be protected (Stallings, 2005: 334). 
Digital Signatures: They are used for message authentication. It offers protection to two 
entities that communicate with each other for a third-party. However, digital signatures do 
not provide protection to the entities for each other (Stallings, 2005: 378). 
 
4.4 Security Measures 
Hardware 
When the mobile phone / smartphone is stolen or lost there are mechanisms, so that the 
memory of the phone can be erased remotely by the user or the user can report the phone as 
stolen and lock it. With these measures, the person, who has the mobile phone and they are 
not the legitimate owner, cannot have access to the wallet application or at the information 
that are stored in the secure element (Apple Inc., 2011). 
44 
 
As it was mentioned in the previous chapter, the secure element can be implemented with 
various architectures. A safe solution could be a secure element embedded in the mobile 
phone / smartphone or a removable component that implements a level of security, so that if 
it gets lost or stolen, it would be difficult for an adversary to have access to the stored data. 
To protect the ID of the tag and eliminate the risk of cloning attacks a random algorithm can 
be used. This random algorithm can produce different ID each time. The random ID can be 
used for avoiding collisions and then the tag can be use the unique ID for further actions. 
(Jara et al., 2010). This measure is used with e-passports as well, but an adversary can find 
out if the tag represents a NFC device or a smartcard (Madlmayr et al., 2008a). 
 
Application Layer 
The secure element should be implemented in order to provide security as its name indicates. 
Essential data are stored in the secure element thus, it should be tamper resistant. If the secure 
element is a SIM card then there may be a level of security. Many SIM cards require a PIN 
code to authenticate the identity of a user. 
Cryptographic functions should be applied to protect the data when they are transferred from 
and to the secure element and the applications stored in the secure element should be 
executed safely (Madlmayr et al., 2007).  Moreover, application that need access to the secure 
element should be authorized and authenticated (Madlmayr et al., 2008a). All the applications 
installed on the mobile phone / smartphone and on the secure element should be signed. Not 
signed applications should not be distributed in order to avoid malware. 
Madlmayr et al. (2008b) proposes a payment system which implements different levels of 
security. The secure element has a security applet stored in it. The application wallet does not 
have direct access to the secure element. The secure applet is responsible for all the 
information that leaves and enters the secure element. The information is encrypted. 
Another approach is the addition of a trusted hardware component, which will control the 
system. This component controls the execution of applications. Only the applications, which 
are included in a list can be executed (Schroder et al., 2011). 
Finally, a piece of hardware could be added in the device that contains the cryptographic 
algorithms that are needed for the encryption of the data that are stored in the device. The 
algorithms will run on the additional component and the device will not be overloaded with 
extra functionality. 
 
Communication / Payment / Top – up process 
The above processes present the same risks and the threats, thus the measures that can be 
applied on them are the same. 
Madlmayr et al. (2008b) during the presentation of the payment system, they propose several 
security mechanisms that could be applied. During the top-up process, the security applet 
communicates with the transaction server using session keys in order to avoid relay and 
cloning attacks. The data are encrypted using the AES encryption scheme and signed using 
the RSA. The keys that are needed are stored in the security applet. The signing procedure is 
45 
 
used for non-repudiation and certificates are also used for authentication against the 
transaction server.  
Haselsteiner and Breitfu? (2006) state that a secure channel eliminates the possibility of an 
attack. They propose a different scheme for peer-to-peer communication. They believe that 
the key agreement Diffie-Hellman can be used for the exchange of the secret key and then 
Triple DES or AES can be used for the exchange of data. This security measures can only be 
used for peer-to-peer NFC communication, because the Man-in-the-middle attack cannot be 
implemented (Haselsteiner and Breitfu?, 2006). For an internet connection, another 
asymmetric scheme should be used for the exchange of the public key.  
In order to have a secure communication with devices the NFC protocol can adapt some 
security mechanisms that are in certain mobile operating systems. The encryption schemes, 
Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) and Triple Data Encryption Standard (Triple DES) 
that are used by RIM in Blackberry when the device communicates with the BES can be used 
for the payment and top-up processes (Blackberry, 2011). Jara et al. (2010) present similar 
solutions for secure communication. They present a three level security architecture, which is 
summarized on the table below. 
 
 
Table 4.2. Security Levels. This picture is copies from (Jara, 2010). 
The three-level architecture is designed in order to satisfy each scenario. In the first level, 
there is no need for security; it concerns scenarios that simple tags need identification (Jara, 
2010). The second level regards the payment process. The symmetric cryptography is used 
because it is faster than RSA. RSA add an extra overload to the communication because of its 
complexity. In addition DesFire is used to provide security to the RFID tags (Jara, 2010). 
MiFare is not used because many attacks can be implemented (Kasper et al., 2010). The third 
level was defined in order to provide authenticity, digital signature, confidentiality and 
integrity. It can be used for the key agreement that is needed at level 2 (Jara, 2010).  
The above measures do not provide a solution for relay attacks because it is difficult to be 
protected against them. The main reason is because they can bypass the cryptography 
schemes that are implemented on the application layer (Hancke et al., 2009). However, there 
are other countermeasures that should be taken into account. Hanck et al. (2009) explores 
three different measures; timing constraints, distance bounding and additional verification.  
? Timing constraints: The procedure of relaying a message needs some time. Thus, a 
specific period of time can be implemented in order to detect a late message which 
may be an attack. This measure has been adopted from the ISO 14443 standard. 
46 
 
However, it is no effective, because the time needed from the attacker?s device to 
produce a relay message is much less than the time-outs. Another solution would be to 
eliminate the time-out values, but this would cause problems to the communication 
and legitimate messages could be rejected. The time that is needed from a device to 
generate a response message is likely to be larger than the time-out value. 
Consequently, the solution is not feasible and cannot be implemented. 
? Distance Bounding:  The maximum physical distance between two entities is 
calculated based on the Round-Trip-Time (RTT) of cryptographic challenge response 
pairs. These protocols can detect the delay that is cause by a relay attack.  
? Additional Verification: Relay attacks could be reduced if more checking procedures 
were implemented. Authentication procedures such as face recognition or PIN codes 
so that they legitimate user could be verified. A check could be done to see if a proxy 
device is used. However, these measures increase the transaction time and are not 
preferred. Another solution is an additional device which can monitor the transaction 
and can recognize suspicious transactions. 
The above measures were presented by various authors, who try to reduce the risks that exist 
within the NFC technology and they were identified during their research. However, they 
were not applied a representative number of devices.  
 
4.5 Security Model 
A more general model that can be applied in any mobile payment scheme is presented by 
(Taghiloo et al., 2010). The model tries to satisfy the objectives as they were presented in 
section 4.2. The following figures present the security mechanisms from the sender and 
receiver side. 
 
Figure 4.1 Security mechanisms of sender. This figure is copied from (Taghiloo et al., 2010). 
 
47 
 
The sender applies a hash function to the message and the result of the hash function is 
encrypted and concatenate with the original data. Then the result is encrypted with a secret 
key and the secret key is encrypted with the public key of the receiver. Finally, the two 
encrypted messages or concatenate.  
 
Figure 4.2 Security mechanisms of receiver. This figure is copied from (Taghiloo et al., 
2010). 
 
The receiver extracts the secret key from the sent data and decrypts it by using their private 
key. The message is decrypted with the secret key and then the hash is decrypted with the use 
of the sender?s public key. The hash is applied to the remainder data. The decrypted hash and 
the remainder data are compared. If they are equal, then the data were sent securely. 
 
  
48 
 
5. Discussion 
 
The aim of this project was the assessment of the security mechanisms that are implemented 
on mobile phones and smartphones. Smartphones present a variety of different technologies 
that can be investigated, so we decided to focused on contactless payments and on the Near 
Field Communication protocol when it is integrated in a mobile phone / smartphone.   
The NFC protocol is relatively new and can offer new capabilities to a mobile phone 
/smartphone. Wallet applications can be designed and the user has the ability to choose 
between a variety of services. However, these new application need to have access to 
essential data and bank accounts. As a result, people do not trust this technology and are not 
comfortable using it.  
Our research aimed to find possible vulnerabilities and risks in order to reduce the percentage 
of attacks that can be implemented. Furthermore, we presented solutions and security 
mechanisms that should be added in the NFC technology, so that people will feel safer. Our 
research was not focused in one platform or on one operating system, because the NFC 
technology is not integrated yet in many mobile phones and smartphones. We examine the 
technology and its capabilities at a more abstract level.  
Chapter 2 presented a background research on the relevant topics. The smartphones were 
presented and the most famous operating systems with the security mechanisms they use. 
Moreover, mobile payments were introduced and their categories and we focused on 
contactless payments. Near Field Communication was presented with a variety of details 
about its functionality and its capabilities. The term wallet application was explained and two 
applications were presented as an example. Chapter 2 concludes with explaining why people 
feel so reluctant about using this new technology. The main reason is because they feel 
threatened from the various types of attacks and because smartphones are considered an easy 
target by an adversary. 
In chapter 3, a risk analysis was performed. The method of the risk assessment was chosen in 
order to create a more comprehensive and completed image about the NFC technology. A 
quantitative risk assessment was chosen in order to prioritize which of the found risks must 
be encountered first and which of the proposed solutions are the most appropriate.  
The risk assessment was divided in several steps. First, the context of the protocol should be 
specified. We presented the most important component of the protocol, which is the secure 
element and we explained how the information flows in a representative architecture model. 
Then, we presented possible scenarios of the technology when the user wants to perform a 
payment or communicate with another device. The scenarios were needed in order to 
understand how the protocol interacts with the mobile phone/smartphone and with the 
environment. 
The next step of the assessment was to identify any possible risks that may appear during the 
scenarios. The risks were identified from a series of different attacks. It is obvious that the 
NFC technology does not implement security mechanisms in order to protect its assets. This 
is mainly because the technology derived from RFID, which was proved that has a variety of 
security and privacy issues. After the identification of the risks we examined which of the 
presented risks were the most urgent using three different parameters; exposure, likelihood 
and consequence. 
49 
 
In chapter 4, security measures were proposed in order to enhance the protection of NFC 
protocol and reduce the risks. The security measures that are proposed are result of a 
research. Each measure was evaluated based on its performance and if there is a better 
solution, it is specified. Although, the proposed solutions seem to present a more secure 
protocol, it is expected that other possible solutions can be considered in further 
investigations. 
This project evaluated the NFC protocol and identified some of the risks and threats that can 
occur when certain scenarios are executed. A different selection of scenarios could result 
different risks. Although, the NFC protocol adds new functionality to mobile phones, it has 
much vulnerability that should be addressed. The users will need security assurance in order 
to trust the NFC technology and add it to their everyday activities.  
  
50 
 
6. Future Work 
 
NFC is still considered to be a new technology and it is expected that sometime in the future 
it will be adapted by all mobile phones and smartphones. However, there many issues that 
should be considered. The security mechanisms that are provided by the Near Field 
Communication protocol are inadequate and research should be carried out in order to find 
solution to reduce the risks and protect the assets of users. There are many different aspects 
of smartphones and Near Field Communication payments that can be examined. 
 
6.1 Risk Assessment on Smartphones 
The most used operating systems of smartphones, such Android, iOS and Blackberry have 
begun integrating NFC in the smartphones. Assessments should be performed in order to 
evaluate the addition of the new technology in each platform. Each operating system uses 
different technologies and security mechanisms.  
As a result, when the NFC technology is integrated in the mobile platform, the risks would be 
different. Risk assessments are needed to indicate which components or processes need 
protection.  
 
6.2 Creation of a more robust protocol 
Near Field Communication is a protocol that explains how contactless communication is 
performed. However, ISO 18092, which presents the protocol, focuses on the communication 
and does not include security mechanisms for the protection of the protocol?s participants and 
components. There are many risks that should be addressed and security mechanisms should 
be implemented. These security mechanisms can be included into a new standardization 
based on the existing technology of NFC. 
However, a better and more preferred solution is the creation of a new protocol that will be 
designed with consideration for the possible risks. Thus, the security mechanisms will be 
integrated in the protocol. The new protocol will implement contactless communication with 
protection to users and to the components of the architecture model. 
  
51 
 
References 
 
Android Developers, (2011), What is Android? – Android Developpers [Online] Available: 
http://developer.android.com/guide/basics/what-is-android.html Accessed: September 2011. 
Anokwa, Y., Borriello, G., Pering, T., and Want, R., (2007), “A User Interaction Model for 
NFC Enabled Applications”, Pervasive Computing and Communications Workshops, 2007. 
PerCom Workshops '07, 5th Annual IEEE International Conference, New York, USA, pp. 
357-361. 
Apple Inc., (2011), Apple-iPhone [Online] Available: http://www.apple.com/uk/iphone/ios4/ 
Accessed: September 2011. 
Barclays (2011), Barclays contactless debit cards – Barclays [Online] Available: 
http://www.barclays.co.uk/Helpsupport/Barclayscontactlessdebitcards/P1242561764200 
Accessed: September 2011. 
Barrera, D . and Van Oorschot, P., (2011), “Secure Software Installation on Smartphones," 
Security & Privacy, IEEE, vol. 9, May, pp. 42 - 48. 
Blackberry, (2011), Blackberry Security Features [Online] Available: 
http://uk.blackberry.com/ataglance/security/features.jsp Accessed: September 2011. 
Barton, J.J., Shumin, Z. and Cousins, S.B., (2006), “Mobile phones will become the primary 
personal computing devices”, 7th IEEE Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems & 
Applications (WMCSA'06), pp. 3-9. 
Boyd, J., (2005), “Here Comes The Wallet Phone”. IEEE Spectrum Online. 
Bradford Terri, (2005), “Contactless: The Next Payment Wave?,” Payment System Research 
Briefing, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 
Chang, Y.F., Chen, C.S., and Zhou, H., (2009) "Smart phone for mobile commerce", 
Computer Standards & Interfaces, vol.31, no. 4, pp. 740-747. 
Chen, T., and Peikari, C, (2008), “Malicious Software in Mobile Devices”. Handbook of 
Research on Wireless Security, pp. 1 
Choudhary B. and Risikko J, (2005), “Mobile Device Security Element”, Key Findings from 
Technical Analysis v. 1.0, Mobey Forum. 
Crooker, J, (2003), “Quantitative Risk Assessment: An Outline to being Realistically 
Prepared”, [Online] Available: 
http://www.clermiston.com.au/Documents/Quantitative%20Risk%20Assessment.pdf 
Accessed: September 2011. 
Edwards C., (2010), “Touch me I’electric”, Engineering & Technology, pp.63-65  
Fischer, J. (2009), „NFC in Cell Phones: The New Paradigm for an Interactive World,? 
IEEECommunications Magazine, vol. 47, no. 6, pp. 22-28. 
52 
 
Francis, L., Hancke, G.P.,Mayes, K.E., and Markantonakis, K. (2009), “Potential Misuse of 
NFC Enabled Mobile Handsets with Embedded Security Elements as Contactless Attack 
Platforms.”, Proceedings of the 1stWorkshop on RFIDSecurity and Cryptography (RISC 
2009), in conjunction with the International Conference for Internet Technology and Secured 
Transactions (ICITST 2009), pp. 1–8 
Francis L., Hancke G., Mayes K., and Markantonakis K., (2010), “Practical NFC Peer-to-
Peer Relay Attack using Mobile Phones”, “Workshop on RFID Security” 
Hancke, G., Mayes K., and Markantonakis K., (2009), Confidence in Smart Token 
Proximity: Relay Attacks Revisited. Computers & Security. 
Haselsteiner E., Breitfu? K., (2006), “Security in near field communication (NFC)”, 
Workshop on RFID security, Graz, Austria 
Heikkinen, P. (2009), “A framework for evaluating mobile payments”, Financial Markets and 
Statistics, Bank of Finland. 
International Organization for Standardization, (2004), ISO/IEC 18092 Information 
technology -Telecommunications and information exchange between systems - Near Field 
Communication - Interface and Protocol (NFCIP-1), ISO. 
James, G., (2004), “Malicious threats to Smartphone”, Network Security, vol. 2004, pp. 5-7. 
Jara, A.,J., Alcolea, A., F., Zamora, M. A. and Skarmeta, A. F. G., (2010), “Evaluation of the 
security capabilities on NFC-powered devices”, Smart Objects: Systems, Technologies and 
Applications (RFID Sys Tech), 2010 European Workshop, pp.1-9, Spain. 
Juels, A., “RFID Security and Privacy: A Research Survey", To Appear in the Proceedings of 
IEEE JSAC'06. 
Kasper T., Silbermann M., and C. Paar., (2010) “All You Can Eat or Breaking a Real-World 
Contactless Payment System,” Financial Cryptography and Data Security, vol. 6052, pp. 
343-350. 
Lambert, M. (2005), “Blackberry Security”, Network Security, vol.2005, no.6, pp. 18-20 
Lessard, J. and Kessler, G.C., (2010), “Android Forensics: Simplifying Cell Phone 
Examinations”, Small Scale Device Forensics Journal, vol. 4, no. 1 
Linck, K.,  Pousttchi, K., Wiedemann, D.G, (2006), “ Security issues in mobile payment from 
the customer viewpoint,  Proceedings of the 14
th
 European Conference on Information 
Systems (ECIS), Goteborg, Sweden. 
Madlmayr , G., Dillinger , O., Langer , J., Schaffer , C., Kantner , C., and Scharinger , J. 
(2007) “The benefit of using SIM application toolkit in the context of near field 
communication applications”, International Conference on the Management of Mobile 
Business, ICMB. 
Madlmayr, G., Langer, J., Schaffer, C., Scharinger, J. (2008a), “NFC Devices: Security and 
Privacy”, Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Availability, Reliability and 
Security, Barcelona 
53 
 
Madlmayr, G., Langer, J., Scharinger J. (2008b), “A Secure Near Field Communication based 
Mobile Payment System”, Proceedings der 3. Konferenz Mobilität und Mobile 
Informationssysteme, München 
Meritt J.W, “A Method for Quantitative Risk Analysis”, [Online] Available 
http://csrc.nist.gov/nissc/1999/proceeding/papers/p28.pdf Accessed: September 2011 
Microsoft, (2011), Windows Phone 7 [Online] Available: 
http://www.microsoft.com/windowsphone/en-us/default.aspx Accessed: September 2011. 
Miller, C., Honoroff J., Mason J., “Security Evaluation of Apple´s iPhone”, Independent 
Security Evaluators [Online] http://securityevaluators.com/files/papers/exploitingiphone.pdf 
Accessed: September 2011.  
NFC Forum, (2011), NFC Forum [Online] Available: http://www.nfc-forum.org/aboutnfc/ 
Accessed: September 2011. 
NTT DOCOMO Inc., (2011), Osaifu-Keitai – Services – NTT DOCOMO Global [Online] 
Available: http://www.nttdocomo.com/services/osaifu/index.html Accessed: September 
2011. 
Olsen, C, (2008), “Is contactless payment a reality for the retail industry?”, Card Technology 
Today, vol. 20, pp. 10-11 
Ortiz S. Jr., (2006), “Is Near-Field Communication Close to Success?”, IEEE Computer, vol. 
39, no. 3, pp. 18-20. 
Pandya, V.R. (2008), “iPhone security analysis”, Project Report, Department of Computer 
Science, San Jose State University 
Pasquet M., Reynaud J., Rosenberger C., (2008), “Secure payment with NFC mobile phone 
in the smarttouch project”, Proceedings of the 2008 international symposium on 
Collaborative Technologies and Systems. IEEE, pp. 95–98. 
Pernet-Lubrano, S., (2010), “Mobile Payments: Moving Towards a Wallet in the Cloud?”, 
Communications and Strategies, No. 79, pp. 63-71. 
Raento, M., Oulasvirta, A., and Eagle, N., (2009), “Smartphones: an emerging tool for social 
scientists,” Sociological Methods &Research, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 426. 
Reveilhac, M. and Pasquet, M., (2009), “Promising Secure Element Alternatives for NFC 
Technology”, Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Near Field Communication, 
Hagenberg, Austria, pp.75-80. 
Satyanarayanan, M., (2003), “Swiss Army Knife or Wallet”, Pervasive Computing, pp.3. 
Schmidt, A. and Albayrak, S., (2008), “Malicious software for smartphones”, Technical 
Report TUB-DAI 02/08-01, Technische Universitat Berlin, DAI-Labor. 
Schroder M.S. , Junge F. and Heer J., (2011), “Security through Sandboxing? - Towards 
more secure smartphone platforms”  
54 
 
Shabtai, A., Fledel, Y.,  Kanonov, U., Elovici, Y., and Dolev, S., (2009),  “Google Android: 
A state-of-the-art review of security mechanisms”,  CoRR, abs/0912.5101. 
Shabtai, A., Fledel, Y.,  Kanonov, U., Elovici, Y., and Dolev, S., (2010), “Google Android: A 
comprehensive security assessment”, IEEE Security and Privacy, vol. 8, no.2 pp.35-44. 
Shin, D.(2009)., “Towards an understanding of the consumer acceptance of mobile wallet.”, 
Computers in Human Behavior, vol.25, no. 6, pp. 1343–1354. 
Smart Card Alliance, (2006), “Contactless Payments: Consumer Attitudes and Acceptance in 
the United States”, A Smart Card Alliance and Javelin Strategy and Research Report, 
[Online] http://www.smartcardalliance.org/pages/publications-contactless-payments-
attitudes-acceptance/, Last accessed: 15 September 2011. 
Stallings W., (2005), “Cryptography and Network Security Principles and Practices”, Fourth 
Edition: Prentice Hall 
Tan S., (2002), “Quantitative Risk Analysis Step-By-Step”, [Online] Available: 
http://www.sans.org/reading_room/whitepapers/auditing/quantitative-risk-analysis-step-by-
step_849 Accessed: September 2011 
Tangiloo M., Mohammad A.A., and Mohammad R.R, (2010), “Mobile Based Secure Digital 
Wallet for Peer to Peer Payment System”, International Journal of UbiComp, vol.1, no.4. 
Tomlinson, A., Yau P.W., MacDonald J.A, (2010), “Privacy threats in a mobile enterprise 
social network”, Information Security Technical Report, vol. 15, no. 2, p. 57-66 
Töyssy, S. and Helenius, M., (2006), “About malicious software in smartphones,” Journal in 
Computer Virology, vol. 2, no. 2, pp.109-119. 
Varshney U., Mobile payments, IEEE Computer, vol.35, no.12, pp. 120–121. 
Vaughan-Nichols, S. J., (2003), “OSs battle in the smart-phone market”, Computer, vol. 36, 
no. 6, pp. 10-12. 
Venkataramani, G. and Gopalan S., (2007), “Mobile phone based RFID architecture for 
secure electronic payments using RFID credit cards”, Proceedings of International 
Conference on Availability,Reliability and Security, pp. 610–620, Vienna, Austria, 2007. 
Walker, W., (2010), “Mobile telephony security compromises”, Information Security 
Technical Report, vol. 5, no.3, p. 134-136. 
 
 
