Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  3 
Executive Summery 
 
Information security is an important aspect of any business process, ecommerce or 
governance, hence protection of organization Information Systems (IS) from the 
threats of Confidentiality, Integrity and Availability must be ensured at all times. The 
methodology adopted by security managers to safeguard against potential threats 
largely depends on the organization’s risk management protocols. However, in 
security classes, some organizations try to secure their Information Systems by 
complying to risk management Standards like ISO27000, British Standard 7799 
(BS7799) or American NIST rather than carrying out risk analysis, assessments and 
reviews. In such cases, system security is guided by control requirements outlined in 
the risk management Standards. In contrast, some organizations secure their 
systems through the use of software based security assessment tools like CRAMM, 
OCTAVE or COBRA and then safeguard their IS based on the countermeasure 
recommendations output by the tools. 
 
This project investigates and compares two different approaches to risk assessment: 
the application of security Standard i.e. British Standard BS7799 and the application 
of security assessment tool CRAMM. It then evaluates a complete and secured 
conceptual smart infrastructure model based on the application of both security 
management methodologies; in order to determine the differences in risk exposure, 
risk measurement and control effectiveness. The research is purely investigatory, 
hence it is more of type II with project type weighting ratio of (I/II/III):0/100/0. The 
research involves a good measure of theoretical discussions and review analysis 
involving risk assessment and management procedures. 
 
In addition to what was stated in the review, due to the amount of time and steep 
learning curve required to use the CRAMM software, the project has been adapted 
to use CRAMM logic instead; which is essentially focusing on the manual risk 
calculation aspect of CRAMM. In the thesis, we present the result of using BS7799 
and CRAMM Logic in a business enterprise conceptual model and compare the risk 
mitigation controls offered by both methodologies in terms of risk exposure and 
control measurements. Finally, the evaluation and comparison of two different risk 
assessment methods reported in this thesis, leads to the following insight: 
 
? The BS7799 Standard is too generic and security control technologies are not 
embedded in Standards. Hence, achieving compliance with security Standard 
BS7799 is a substantially daunting task and operationally intensive process. 
 
? BS7799 does not account for the scale of security controls and it is difficult to 
measure the effectiveness of security guidelines in the Standard. While CRAMM 
provides a calculation-based approach to measure and comparing the scale of 
one risk relative to others. 
 
? If an organization holds certification to BS7799, it is suggested that proceedings 
should be commenced on establishing a clearly defined set of security control 
measurements.  
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  5 
Table of Contents 
 
Executive Summary.3 
 
Acknowledgement.....4 
 
Table of Contents.5 
 
List of Tables......8 
. 
List of Figures..9 
 
Chapter 1: Introduction10 
 
1.1 - Introduction to the Project.10 
 
1.2 - Motivation behind the project....11 
 
1.3 - Project Aim Objective..11 
 
1.3.1 - Objective Outlines...12  
 
1.4 - Report Layout...12 
 
1.5 - Summary..12 
 
Chapter 2: Background.13 
 
2.1 – Introduction....13 
 
2.2 - Terms Definition.13 
 
2.3 - Threat Categorization.15 
 
2.3.1 - Human...15 
 
2.3.2 - Natural15 
 
2.3.3 - Technical15 
 
2.4 - Risk Management Overview16 
 
2.5 - Adopted risk management methodologies..18 
 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  6 
2.5.1 - The British Standard 7799 (BS7799).18 
 
2.5.1.1 - BS7799 Process Approach....19 
 
2.5.2 - CCTA Risk Analysis and Management Method (CRAMM)..22 
 
2.5.2.1 - Asset identification and valuation22 
 
2.5.2.2 - Threat-Vulnerability Assessment & Risk 
Calculation23 
2.5.2.3 - Identify and Prioritize Countermeasures...26 
 
2.6 - Other Risk Assessment Methodologies..26 
 
2.6.1 - The ISO/IEC 27002.27 
 
2.6.2 - Risk Management Guide.....27 
 
2.6.3 - OCTAVE.28 
 
2.6.4 - COBRA..28 
 
2.7 - Summary.28 
 
Chapter 3: Conceptual Model System Description..29 
 
3.1 - Introduction.29 
 
3.2 - Scope...29 
 
3.3 - Information Asset Classification...29 
 
3.4 - Inventory of major Information Asset..34 
 
3.5 - Initial Risk Ranking Order..36 
 
3.6 - Summery.....38 
 
Chapter 4: Implementation of Threat Assessment..39 
 
4.1 - Introduction...39 
 
4.2 - Applying BS7799-2:2002 Methodology39 
 
4.3 - Applying CRAMM Logic Methodology..43 
 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  7 
Chapter 5: Results and Analysis.48 
 
Chapter 6: Conclusion and Discussion..51 
 
Chapter 7: Future Work..53 
 
References.....................................................................54 
 
Appendix57 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  8 
List of Tables 
 
Table 1: BS7799 Clause A.721 
 
Table 2: Risk Likelihood and Severity Description..24 
 
Table 3: Risk Rating Table25 
 
Table 4: Risk Assessment Matrix.25 
 
Table 5: Inventory of Assets..35 
 
Table 6: Catalogue of Threats36 
 
Table 7: Initial Risk Ranking Table..37 
 
Table 8: BS7799 Controls.42 
 
Table 9: Measure of Risk and Final Threat Ranking44 
 
Table 10: CRAMM Controls.47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  9 
List of Figures 
 
Figure 1: Risk Management Cycle.......17 
 
Figure 2: PCDA Model applied to ISMS Process20 
 
Figure 3: CRAMM Graphical Interface.23 
 
Figure 4: High Level Conceptual Model Diagram.31 
 
Figure 5: Low Level Conceptual Model Diagram....33 
 
Figure 6: Gross Risk Map..48 
 
Figure 7: Risk Management49 
 
Figure 8: Net Risk Map..49 
 
Figure 9: Pre Mitigation Risk Ratio50 
 
Figure 10: Post Mitigation Risk Ratio.....50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  10 
Chapter 1 
 
Introduction 
 
 
1.1 - Introduction to the Project 
 
In recent years, especially the last two decades, seamless augmentation of 
Information Technology (IT) applications in homes, offices and other infrastructures 
have become the norm. Advancement in technology, i.e. computing processing 
power, communication bandwidth, digital storage and databases have resulted in a 
true ubiquitous computing environment whereby systems fit around users rather 
than the other way round. Similarly, smart buildings which incorporate system 
critical services have witnessed tremendous changes over the same period of time, 
with respect to the increasingly reliant on interconnected and automated systems 
that perform specific functions. As such, IT security has become quite an important 
consideration for modern organizations. Importance of information security cannot 
be over emphasized, especially in today’s areas of key interest which spans network 
security, disaster recovery planning, and risk analysis and management [1]. 
 
This project describes the feasibility of using two clearly different risk management 
techniques to guide a smart infrastructure security policy and architectural design 
decisions. However, the ‘Hacking the Bridge’ component of this project is basically 
about penetrating any smart infrastructure that depends on intelligent technologies 
rather than a ‘bridge’ in specific sense. It is more about any civil bridges like a 
motorway, airport, business enterprise or any other infrastructure and we are 
addressing the hacking aspect of it as well as major potential cases where somebody 
can cause security breach in the systems like that. Information security is 
undoubtedly the most important challenge faced by IT managers in order to remain 
on top of their games against adversaries; “The aim of information security is to 
ensure business continuity by preventing and minimizing the impact of security 
incidents” [2]. Security risk assessment also known as risk analysis is an essential and 
fundamental component of security control in any organization. By carrying out risk 
analysis, it is possible to realize the scale of potential damage that may be caused by 
breaching the security of such infrastructure, against the backdrop of confidentiality, 
integrity and availability.  
 
Over the years, IT industry regulatory bodies have proposed various Standards and 
controls which are benchmark for security management guidelines. Similarly, 
vendors in the industry have provided various automated software packages for risk 
analysis of information systems and associated threats. However, applying the 
appropriate tool usually depends on organizations peculiar security risks and security 
policies.  A lot of the conventional methods in use today for performing security risk 
analysis are becoming more and more untenable in terms of usability, flexibility, 
measurability and end user output [3]. Naturally, organizations, government 
establishments and business enterprises protect their IT infrastructures through by 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  11 
using two different basic approaches; either by complying with industry regulatory 
Standards or by using risks assessment tools. This project investigates the adoption 
of both approaches in order to determine the most effective and measurable risk 
assessment method.  
 
 In the project, we conceptualized a particular case study of a private college in 
Stratford, London. The idea is to incorporate a large number of IT systems that 
manage vital services such as servers, databases, energy consumption monitoring, 
surveillance & access control, fire detection, air-conditioning, lift performance 
adjustments etc., and then critically evaluate the IT systems against potential risks of 
disaster and risks of abuse in equal measures.  
 
 
 
1.2 - Motivation behind the project 
   
A lot of the modern infrastructures i.e. airports, motorways, rail networks, business 
enterprises etc. depends on critical IT infrastructure these days and are more 
increasingly reliant on essential networks like access control, information processing 
and monitoring systems which are all part of integrated computer networks; such 
that if the essential networks are taken away, breached or hacked in any way, it then 
becomes more difficult to manage such infrastructure. Therefore, understanding 
organizational risk acceptance threshold is vital in order to channel resources to 
control, prevented or transfer risks in the most appropriate manner. In other words, 
it is not good management if a lot of resources are dedicated to security solutions in 
order to prevent risks that are of no significant impact to an organization, similarly, it 
is equally wrong not to channel the right amount of resources or not acquiring the 
right security solution to mitigate risks of potentially colossal consequences, while 
hoping that such risk will never happen.   
 
Information Security Management is an interesting area that is part of motivation for 
this project. There has been a lot of work documented on the risk assessment of 
different types of infrastructure i.e. a home office or small business enterprise model 
but this work is different in the sense that it investigates the differences in two 
different methodologies adopted to secure a smart infrastructure. It specifically 
compares and evaluates the use of BS7799 and CRAMM Logic in terms of security 
control metrics or measurements. 
 
 
 
1.3 - Project Aim Objective 
 
The aim of the project is to conduct information risk analysis of a smart 
infrastructure in order to understand the potential risks and exposures of 
Information System (IS) in it and propose appropriate countermeasures 
recommendations to address such risks.  
 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  12 
 
1.3.1 - Objective Outlines  
 
Objectives outline to accomplish the overall aim of his project are as follows:  
 
? Provide comprehensive background information on the two assessment 
methodologies adopted for this project. The British Standard BS7799 and 
CRAMM risk assessment software. 
? Develop a conceptual model of a smart infrastructure while taking into account 
different types of IT applications likely to exist within it. Produce a top level and 
low level graphical representation of the conceptual model. 
? Prepare survey questionnaire and obtain dataset from real system users/owners 
in order to relate similar IT applications to our model.  
? Carry out risk analysis on the conceptualised model using both methodologies 
mentioned above, and present in-depth analysis of the project results.  
 
 
1.4 - Report Layout 
 
This project report is divided into chapters starting from the introduction, which 
describes the project overview and provides general information on the direction of 
this report. Chapter 2 covers the project research background, term definitions and 
clarifies some gray areas that were highlighted during the interim review feedback. It 
covered security management Standards and security assessment tools with 
emphasis on those that are in line with UK requirements. Chapter 3 covers the 
description of systems in our conceptual model, including asset classification, threat 
ranking as well as top level and low level model diagram. Chapter 4 describes the 
process of applying BS7799 and CRAMM Logic methodologies to secure our 
conceptual model. Chapter 5 presents the project results and analysis of 
measurements. Chapter 6 showcases the project conclusion and in-depth discussion 
to sum up the investigation conducted in this project. Finally, Chapter 7 suggests 
possible areas of future work based on some limitations identified in this project. 
 
 
 
1.5 - Summary 
 
This chapter has been able to set the scene for the overall project report, it has 
touched on the increasing ubiquitous nature of IT systems, the importance of 
security risk assessment, the project aim and objectives outline, the project report 
layout and most importantly, the motivation for this project. There have been a 
slight change in the objectives of this project since the project review period; this is 
largely due to unavailability of CRAMM software among other reasons. However, we 
are still able to stick with the overall aim of this project.  
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  13 
Chapter 2 
 
Background 
 
 
2.1 - Introduction 
 
This chapter introduces the two security risk assessment methodologies we have 
adopted for this project as well as brief description of other risk assessment 
methodologies not considered for this project. It also covers general background on 
risk management and definition of terms used throughout the context of this report. 
Later on in chapter 4 of this report, some assumptions were considered in the 
implementation stage; analysis of the two adopted methodologies in this chapter 
will help the reader to understand the rationale behind those assumptions. 
 
 
 
2.2 - Terms Definition 
 
In order to discuss security assessment within the scope of this project, we find it 
necessary to define a number of terms used in this work as described in [3] and [4]. 
 
Availability: Protection of systems and data from intentional and accidental attempt 
to cause denial of service, unauthorized deletion or unauthorized purposes. It is also 
about ensuring timely and reliable access to and use of information. 
 
Integrity: Ensuring systems remain operable throughout organization life cycle by 
guarding against improper destruction and modification of information, including 
authentication and non-repudiation. 
 
Asset: General support systems and high impact programs including personnel, 
mission critical systems, equipment, physical plant or logically related group of 
systems. 
 
Accountability: Security objective that generates requirement for action of an entity 
to be uniquely traced to that entity at individual level. It supports intrusion detection 
and prevention, non-repudiation, deterrence and fault isolation. 
 
Confidentiality: Preserving authorized restriction to sensitive information from 
individuals, entities or processes while it is in storage, being processed or in transit. 
 
Assessment Method: It is one of the three types of action: examine, interview or 
test taken by assessors during an assessment in order to obtain evidence. 
 
Attack: Any kind of malicious action that attempts to compromise system activities 
or gain unauthorized access to information resources and system services. 
 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  14 
Risk Assessment: Part of risk management framework which identify, prioritize and 
estimate risks as well as determines the impact of adverse circumstances on an 
enterprise. 
 
Risk Mitigation: The evaluation, prioritization and implementation of appropriate 
risk reducing controls based on the recommendation of risk assessment processes. 
 
Threat: Potential circumstances or event of adverse impact on organization, assets, 
individuals and operations as a result of unauthorized disclosure, destruction, access 
and modification of information, and denial of service. 
 
Baseline Security: Minimum level of security controls required for safeguarding an IT 
system against the threat of integrity, confidentiality and availability protection. 
 
Business Continuity Plan (BCP): A document that describes predetermined set of 
procedure and instructions that details organization plan of action to sustain any 
significant disruption to its mission/business functions. 
 
Business Impact Analysis (BIA): Analysis of enterprise information system 
requirements, interdependencies and processes used to characterize contingency 
requirements and priorities in the case of disruption of significant scale. 
 
Chief Information Officer (CIO): Organization official responsible for: 1) providing 
advice to head of the executive agency in order to ensure that information resources 
are managed and consistent with the requirements of legislation or industry 
Standards. 2) Develop, facilitate and maintain integrated information technology for 
the organization. 
 
Countermeasures: Techniques, processes, devices, actions and other measures that 
reduce prevent or eliminate vulnerability of an information system. 
 
Risk: Information system related security risks are the risks that arise from the loss 
of integrity, confidentiality and availability of information systems. It is a measure of 
the degree to which Information System is threatened based on the function of 1) 
the adverse impact of an event occurring and 2) the likelihood of the occurrence. 
 
Impact: The magnitude of harm that can occur as a consequence of unauthorized 
disclosure, modification, destruction of information or information system, and loss 
of availability. 
 
Information Security Policy: Aggregate of direction, practices, rules and regulations 
that describe how an organization distributes, protects and manages information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  15 
2.3 - Threat Categorization 
 
Every security risk assessment process should begin with threat identification 
procedures and understanding potential threat factors such as sources, methods, 
motivation and consequences. Similarly, since organization operational 
environment, information systems, policies and physical resources can influence 
different types of risk sources, it is essential that potential threats are grouped or 
defined in a common set of criteria which can be used for comparison and 
evaluation purposes [5]. Threats classification is an important step towards the 
implementation of information security management. Though, different types of 
threat classifications have been proposed by industry Standards, government and 
security experts but they are generally incompatible and difficult to be compared [6], 
in the context of this report however, we shall focus on threat categorization as 
proposed in [7], which posits that there are three intuitive categories of threats:  
 
 
2.3.1 - Human 
 
These are people oriented threats that usually involve individuals within and outside 
an organization. Insider oriented threats are some of the most difficult threats to 
deal with because of insiders familiarity with system resources, capabilities, locations 
and performances. This is a broad category with range of capabilities and 
motivations which can be further divided into sub-groups for independent 
assessment. These include hackers, crackers, terrorists; partners and competitors 
est. Human threats also include indiscipline and negligence. 
 
2.3.2 - Natural 
 
These threats are of non-human nature and occur in circumstances that are beyond 
organization control. These include all forms of natural disaster like fire, earthquake, 
flood, storm, hurricane est. although, no business enterprise, government 
institutions or organizations is exempted from the exposure to natural threats, it is 
possible to predict the likelihood of occurrence based on indicators like geographical 
location among others. 
 
2.3.3 - Technical 
 
These types of threats are capable of causing extensive damage to information 
systems with little or no human supervision at all. They are characterized with a 
blend of human/non-human involvement especially during the development stage 
and once completed, they can take up the ‘form of life’ and execute human-like 
commands. This category of threats is usually deployed on networks and examples 
include viruses, Trojan horse, worms and logic bomb. Technical threats can also 
include genuine technical mistakes like communication error, malfunctions, software 
defects and unavailability of systems (down time errors). 
 
 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  16 
2.4 - Risk Management Overview 
 
In general terms, all Information Systems (IS) involve risk of some sort at one stage 
or the other, as such it can be implied that risk is an intrinsic part of any organization 
IS and business processes. How to mitigate those risks therefore forms an important 
component of any management decision making process [8]. According to the 
definitions proposed in [9] and [10], “Risk is a function of the likelihood of a given 
threat, exercising a particular potential vulnerability and the resulting impact of that 
adverse event on the organization”. It is the adverse effect as a result of actualized 
threat. In the context of Information Systems, [11] posits that “the likelihood that a 
firm’s information systems are insufficiently protected against certain kinds of 
damage or loss is known as system risk”. It was further affirmed that system risk has 
been a back-burner issues for too long, even among the top practitioners and 
managers of Information Technology (IT). 
 
Information System risk varies depending on organizational risk acceptance level; 
however, risks are generally described under the broad categorization of disaster or 
abuse. Top priority of Chief Information Officers (CIO) and managers (to a larger 
extent) is to ensure constant functionality of IT resources throughout all levels of 
operations. They ensure that organizational risk exposure that could undermine the 
confidentiality; integrity and availability of mission-critical systems are adequately 
managed. Usually, unmitigated risks lead to negative corporal image, bad reputation 
and sometimes colossal financial losses. This assumption was buttressed in [11], 
where it was reported that based on studies proposed over the years to quantify the 
actual and potential value of losses as a result of successful system breaches; the 
value was put in the region of $500 million and $5 billion per year in the United 
States alone and this trend continues to grow. As such, the importance of risk 
management cannot be over emphasized. 
 
Risk management (RM) can be described as a systematic and logical approach to 
identifying, treating, analyzing and monitoring risks in any process. Managers benefit 
from risk management methodologies because it directly influences how available 
resources are put to best use [12]. RM practice transcends a wide range of jobs, 
activities and operations that cover public and private sectors: health care, 
government establishments, insurance, finance and investments, educational 
institutions est. in fact, RM has become an essential component of business 
planning. However, in the context of Information Security (which is basically about 
the protection of information assets), the need for security risk management is even 
stronger than physical asset protection with respect to corporate government 
responsibilities. Information Security Risk Management is defined in [13] as “the 
protection of information from a wide range of threats in order to ensure business 
continuity, manage business risk and maximize return on investment”. Risk 
management involves the implementation of appropriate controls to mitigate risks. 
However, since risks and threats changes all the time, it is essential that the 
effectiveness and appropriateness of selected controls must be reassessed and 
reconsidered periodically by the organization. This is an important element of risk 
management cycle [14]. There are various reasons why an organization may require 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  17 
some measures of security control against potential threats; these could stem from 
internal factors i.e. corporate regulations and organizational policies or externally 
influences i.e. data protection acts [15] or to comply to industry regulatory 
Standards. Typically, risk management cycle involves 7 distinct steps irrespective of 
organization business or function, as shown in the risk management cycle diagram in 
figure 1. The 7 risk management steps are described here according to [13]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Establish the Context: This covers basic understanding of an organization business 
process in a broader perspective. It includes overview of the nature of risks inherent 
in the business model as well as how management prioritizes those risks. 
 
Identify the Risks: this covers the identification of risks and how such risks affect to 
organization goals and objectives. It takes into account how stakeholders are 
affected or involved in risks while considering past events and future developments. 
 
Analyze the Risk: this covers analysis of the probability and frequency of risk events 
happening as well as the political, social and economical impact or financial 
consequences of such events happening. 
 
Evaluate the Risk: this covers ranking of inherent risk levels based on the likelihood 
and consequence of risks according to management proprieties. 
 
Treat the Risk: this involves developing and implementing countermeasures to 
mitigate identified risks while taking into account management priorities, resources 
and risk acceptance level. 
Figure 1: Risk Management Cycle 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  18 
 
Monitor and Review: this involves continuous monitoring of activities and processes 
through the use of data evaluation, compliance measurement or audit methods in 
order to determine the effectiveness of measures adopted to treat risks. Risk 
management policies and decisions must be reviewed regularly. 
 
Communicate and Consult: given that risks are dynamic, the process of 
communication and consultation must be regular in order to recognize when there is 
a shift in organization risk acceptance threshold. 
 
 
 
 
2.5 - Adopted Risk Management Methodologies 
 
There is no regulation that spells out in legal terms the need for specific IT controls 
to mitigate risks like security logging, back-ups, and password management est. 
instead, Security Management Standards focus on the fundamental need for 
confidentiality, integrity and availability in the realms of operational, physical and 
technical security [3]. Similarly, software risk assessment tools simplify the process 
of risk management through automated risk scoring matrix. Software tools automate 
the processing of security inputs in order to ease the burden of security 
management [16]. Different organizations adopt different approach to risk 
management depending on peculiar security requirements. This section introduces 
the risk assessment methodologies adopted for this project, although, these risk 
management methodologies does not represent all of the techniques available to 
CIOs and managers but the methodologies were used  based on the amount of 
support is receives from IS stakeholders. The BS7799 Standard discussed here is 
arguably the most common Standard for security management and it has been 
adopted and published in several countries including the UK [17]. Similarly, the 
CRAMM software assessment tool is one of the most popular security assessment 
tools among security managers and also approved by the British Government. It is 
the most widely used methodology in Europe for risk analysis and management [18]. 
This section will aid the reader to understand the working order and basic 
differences of these methodologies before they are applied to the risk assessment 
process in our model. 
 
 
2.5.1 - The British Standard 7799 (BS7799) 
 
Collaboration between some British companies, international companies as well as 
the department of trade and industries led to the development of the Code of 
Practice (CoP) for information security management which later became the British 
Standard 7799 (BS 7799).   The Standard contained in a publication released in 1993 
was basically a compilation of the best Information System (IS) practices sampled 
from international companies. Over 100 controls were included in the code of 
practice, which collectively form the baseline of good security practice.  
 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  19 
A revised version of the Standard known as BS 7799-2: 2002 was later published in 
2002 to include ten key control areas that are essential for all organizations. The 
British Standard 7799 (BS7799) is arguable the most widely used and recognized 
security Standard in the world and also has comprehensive coverage of security 
issues. BS7799 is a framework for security best practices and contains guidelines for 
the improvement of organization security [19], such that business managers and 
staff can use the model for setting up effective security management systems. It is 
also used by certification bodies to assess organization abilities to meet regulatory 
and customer demands as well as organizational ability to meet its own 
requirements. BS7799 is a comprehensive guideline with significant number of 
control requirements which can be complex to implement sometimes; hence it is 
recommended that using the Standard to obtain full certification should be carried 
out in ‘step by step’ order. It is a very detailed document organized into 10 major 
sections (version BS7799-2:2002) for ease of implementation, and each section 
cover different topic areas.  
 
BS7799 is guided by a process approach called Plan-Do-Check-Act (PCDA) principles 
[20], which ensures that organizations information security systems and 
accreditation are in line with industry best practices. As stated earlier in this report, 
some organizations secure their systems by applying control requirements and 
demands of the BS7799 Standard; next, this report briefly describes the PCDA model 
of BS7799 so that the reader can understand the Standard process approach. 
 
 
2.5.1.1 - BS7799 Process Approach 
 
BS7799 uses a process approach for monitoring, implementing and maintain 
organization’s Information Security Management Systems (ISMS) effectively. Process 
approach can be referred to as the identification, interaction and management of 
systems or processes within an organization in order to understand its information 
security requirements. It covers the implementation of operational security controls, 
overall business risks and performance review of ISMS. A process model adopted in 
BS7799 which can be applied to all business models is known as the Plan-Do-Check-
Act (PCDA) model. PCDA model is a virtual cycle of activities that ensures 
organization best practices are documented, reinforced and improved with time. The 
end of one phase is an input to the next, and it is expected to be a continuous cycle 
of activities for all ISMS processes. 
 
The model essentially takes information security requirement and expectations as 
input, through actions and processes that meets those requirements; then produces 
an output of a managed information; figure 2 illustrates the PCDA model process 
and each phase of the model is described as follows [21]. 
 
The plan phase: This design ensures that scope and context of ISMS is established 
correctly and takes into account plans to identify security risks as well as appropriate 
treatment for each risk. Basically, the plan phase covers information security policy, 
scope of the ISMS, risk identification, assessment and treatment plan. 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Do Phase: this cycle implements and promotes selected controls for the 
management of information security risk, in line with all decisions take in the plan 
phase. This phase covers resource training and awareness, and risk treatment. 
 
The check phase: this cycle is designed to check the effective of controls as ensure 
they are working as expected; and if such controls are found to be inadequate either 
as a result of change to the scope or assumption of security assessment, then 
necessary corrective actions are determined. The check phase covers routine 
checking, management review, ISMS audit and trend analysis. 
 
The Act Phase: this phase is concerned with regular improvement of the information 
collected during the check phase in order to maintain effective ISMS. The purpose of 
this phase is to take appropriate action based on the result of the check phase 
activities. In fact, any non-conformity issues i.e. failure or absence to implement any 
of the requirements of ISMS is acted upon by taking corrective action at the Act 
Phase. 
 
 
Using BS7799 to secure Information Systems involve meeting control objective 
requirements of the Standard by implementing controls listed in the code of practice 
guidance BS ISO/IEC 17799; covering Clauses A.3 to A.12. The Clauses outlined 
implementation guidelines for best practices in support of organization security 
requirements.  
 
Figure 2: PCDA Model applied to ISMS processes (Adopted from BSI, 2002) 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  21 
A quick scenario of using BS7799: If areas of security concern based on scope of the 
organization (and as part of the PCDA process) has been identified to be physical and 
environment security related. Then using BS7799 clause A.7 which addresses 
Physical and environmental security as shown in Table 1 (BS7799 Clause A.7); our 
control objective is to prevent unauthorized access, damage and interference to 
business premises and information (sub clause number A.7.1 Secure Areas) or 7.1 (if 
we are using BS ISO/IEC 17799:2000 numbering system). We only need to identify 
required control and implement the requirement/guidelines proposed by the 
Standard. Using table 1, it can be seen that implementing control A.7.1.2 to secure 
physical entry requires carrying out corresponding security guideline in the Standard 
which states that “secure areas shall be protected by appropriate entry controls to 
ensure that only authorized personnel are allowed access”. However, the type of 
security solution deployed to this effect depends on the requirement of individual 
ISMS. Detailed control objective and controls are documented in [21]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 1: BS7799 Clause A.7 (Adopted from BSI, 2002) 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  22 
2.5.2 - CCTA Risk Analysis and Management Method (CRAMM) 
 
CRAMM is an automated risk analysis and management tool based on quantitative 
risk assessment methodology and extensively used since 1987 [22] and [23]. It does 
not require much resource and runs on standard windows operating system. Though 
a flexible tool, it is comprehensive and requires qualified and experienced user to 
ensure efficient result. It is consistent with the UK Government security policy and 
Standard BS99: 1995, now ISO/IEC 2007 code of practice for information 
management [22] and [24]. CRAMM is more suitable for systems that are already 
operational rather than those still in developments but it can be used for any IT 
infrastructure security assessment. The CRAMM software tool has a graphical 
interface that guides the review process as shown in figure 3. Basically, CRAMM 
follows a fundamental approach to establish a consistent measure of risk matrix 
[25], these approach focuses on: 1) the possibility, level and frequency with which 
threats might occur. 2) The level of vulnerability of threat. 3) The impact of threat. 
 
CRAMM is the Risk Analysis (RA) tool adopted for this project because of its 
extensive use and mandatory choice for UK governmental organizations. Therefore, 
there is more assessment of its features than other RA tools mentioned in this 
report. CRAMM review risk in three distinct stages, these stages are itemized below 
and briefly described as proposed in [22], [24] and [25]: 
 
? Identify and value assets,  
? Identify threats, vulnerabilities and calculate risks;  
? Identify and prioritize countermeasures;  
 
 
2.5.2.1 - Asset identification and valuation 
 
This phase deals with identification and valuation of assets where all interrelated 
assets are defined in asset model. Modeling is an important feature of CRAMM; it 
ensures that important assets are not missed out due to too fine or too coarse 
granularity.  CRAMM considers both tangible assets e.g. IT equipments and 
intangible assets e.g. information and draws asset valuation against the backdrop of 
confidentiality, integrity, availability and non-repudiation of resources. Measures of 
the severity of these impacts are then compared to the guidelines of CRAMM to 
generate values within the range of 1 to 10 e.g. the effect of crashed mail server 
over 1 hour or 10 months. In the case of physical assets or application software, 
financial cost of replacement or reconstruction is determined by interviewing the 
personnel privy to such information; feedbacks are then translated to the same scale 
value described above.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.5.2.2 - Threat-vulnerability assessment and Risk calculation 
 
The next phase involves the assessment of treats identified above and the 
vulnerability as a result of those threats. Although, CRAMM comes with pre-defined 
table of threats and impact combinations but not only is the list exhaustive, it is 
more productive if reviewers chose threats and assets in accordance to customers 
need. Structured questionnaires are used to obtain feedback from support 
personnel; the feedback is then used as input to CRAMM. It then generates 
risk/vulnerability output based on five scale levels of very low, low, medium, high 
and very high. For the purpose of this work, we are using manual calculations based 
on CRAMM Logic [25], See table 2 for description of likelihood and severity of risk, 
especially in terms of financial impact. Likelihood of risk is ranked on the scale of 1 to 
5 where 1 is rare or very low and 5 is frequent or very high.  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: CRAMM Graphical Interface – (Adopted from Yazar, Z. 2002) 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  24 
Likelihood Description Frequency of Occurrences 
1 An incident is expected to 
occur in exceptional 
circumstances, e.g. once in 10 
years 
Rare/Very Low 
2 An incident may occur at some 
point, e.g. once in 3 years 
Possible/Low 
3 An incident will occasionally 
recur, e.g. once in a year 
Probable/Medium 
4 An incident will occur in most 
circumstances, e.g. once every 
4 months 
Certain/High 
5 An incident is certain to occur 
in most circumstances, e.g. 
once every month 
Frequent/Very High 
Severity Description Example of Business 
Impact 
1 None:  no disruption of service Financial loss < £1000  
2 Minor Financial loss < £10, 000 
5 Moderate Financial loss < £100, 000 
10 Significant Financial loss < £1, 000 000 
15 High Financial loss > £1, 000 000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Similarly, table 3 shows the risk scoring matrix by taking into account the likelihood 
and severity value of each risk.  
 
Risk is scored based on the formula: 
 
 Risk = Likelihood of Risk (Occurrence) x Severity of Risk (Impact) 
 
Risk scoring is carried out by applying a simple multiplication process whereby the 
likelihood of risk is multiplied by the severity of the risk occurrence.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2: Risk likelihood and severity description  
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
After scoring each risk, risk rating is then applied by choosing the most appropriate 
definition under likelihood and the most appropriate definition under severity, and 
then the numbers are looked up on the risk matrix table and matched to obtain the 
risk rating. Table 4 shows the risk assessment matrix which describes the 
relationship between risk rating, colour code, risk description and expected 
management actions. 
 
 
 
Risk 
Rating 
Color 
Code 
Description Action 
1 – 5  Very Low Risk Effective control measures are in place 
and severity of risk is very low. 
6 – 14  Low Risk If control measures are not implemented, 
probability of harm is low but risk 
mitigating action is required within 6 
months. 
15 -30  Moderate Risk If control measures are not implemented, 
probability of harm is moderate but risk 
mitigating action is required within 3 
months. 
40 -60  High Risk If control measures are not implemented, 
probability of harm is significant. Risk 
mitigating action is required immediately. 
75  Unacceptable Risk Risk is unacceptable and all services 
processes and procedures must be 
stopped. Immediate risk mitigating action 
is required. 
Table 3: Risk rating table (Adapted from West Essex PCT 2010) 
Table 4: Risk Assessment Matrix 
 
 
 
 
 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  26 
2.5.2.3 - Identify and Prioritize Countermeasures 
 
CRAMM comes with over 3000 predefined library of countermeasures grouped with 
respect to security requirements in hardware, software, communication, procedural, 
physical and personal resource [23]. After the risk analysis phase, CRAMM output 
sets of countermeasures relevant to the management of risks in context. Security 
countermeasures are also rated on a scale of 1 to 7, with 7 being very high. This is 
based on ‘Annual Loss Expectancy’ figures which are translated into CRAMM 
measure of risk scale. The idea is to compare existing security measures to CRAMM 
recommended security profile, so that areas of low protection and overprotection 
can be identified. Each of the countermeasures in the CRAMM library contains the 
following information: 
 
? a reference number;  
? a narrative description;  
? the position in the countermeasure hierarchical structure;  
? a cross-reference to other related countermeasures (where applicable);  
? Minimum and maximum measures of risk/security level for the impacts each 
threat. 
 
 
However, due to the steep learning curve required to be comfortable with the 
CRAMM software as well as time constraints, this project has been modified from 
using CRAMM software to using CRAMM Logic (risk scoring matrix), which is  
calculation based approach to determining appropriate countermeasures. The 
process still follows similar fashion as CRAMM software especially in the areas of 
asset identification and evaluation, and threat identification and calculation, though 
calculations are carried out manually. Finally, countermeasures are derived from the 
over 3000 library of countermeasures (in our case, it was obtained from CRAMM 
v5.1 manual and mapped appropriately to the results of risk scoring matrix.  
 
CRAMM has many advantages over other security assessment methodologies, 
notable one is its structured approach to risk analysis and a method that is well 
established. However, major shortcoming of CRAMM is that full review can take 
months to generate report and it also requires experienced practitioner. 
 
 
 
 
2.6 - Other Risk Assessment Methodologies 
 
There are other security assessment and management methodologies as well as 
tools but because they are not selected for this project based on the discussions in 
section 2.5. There is no point conducting extensive review of the tools. However, for 
the purpose of completeness, some of the notable RA methodologies are 
summarized below as described in [9]: 
 
 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  27 
2.6.1 - The ISO/IEC 27002 
 
ISO/IEC 27002 was published by the international Organization for Standardization 
(ISO) and the International Electro technical Committee (IEC) published in 2002. It is 
a derivative of the original British Standard BS7799. Though, ISO/IEC 27002 is 
currently under review, it is a normal occurrence every few years in order to 
preserve the relevance of the Standard in the face of today’s dynamic and 
sophisticated range of information security threats. The ISO/IEC provides area of 
comprehensive coverage that meets the risk management requirement of 
organizations in the area of business involving people, services, process, information 
technology and physical assets [27]. The ISO/IEC Standard have now become a 
globally recognized framework for the provision of a sound information security 
management and organizations continue to seek certification to it. It is robust 
enough to be adopted by both commercial and government organizations yet 
flexible to be used by small organizations as well. Control areas covered by the 
ISO/IEC 27002 Standard are: 
 
? Information security policy 
? Organization information security 
? Asset management 
? Physical environment security 
? Communications and operations management 
? Access control 
? Information systems acquisition, development and maintenance 
? Information security incident management 
? Business continuity management 
? compliance 
 
2.6.2 - Risk Management Guide 
 
Risk Management Guide for Information Technology Systems is a US government 
standard methodology developed by the National Institute of Standards & 
Technology (NIST). It is anchored on the NIST special publication (SP) 800-30. Risk 
Management Guide is a qualitative and comprehensive risk assessment tool 
designed for skilled security analysts and technical experts for risk management. It 
follows nine distinct steps of threat evaluation processes: 
 
? System Characterization 
? Threat Identification 
? Vulnerability Identification 
? Control Analysis 
? Likelihood Determination 
? Impact Analysis 
? Risk Determination 
? Control Recommendations 
? Results Documentation 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  28 
2.6.3 - OCTAVE 
 
Operationally Critical, Threat, Asset and Vulnerability Evaluation (OCTAVE) 
methodology is a workshop based process developed by the Software Engineering 
Institute (SEI) of Carnegie Mellon University. The primary aim of OCTAVE is to assist 
organizations to improve the management and protection against information risks. 
Workshop-based approach of OCTAVE implies that organizations will understand risk 
evaluation more than the tool based approach; as such final decisions like 
countermeasures will be made by the organizations rather than the tool. The three 
phases of OCTAVE process include: knowledge gathering about important assets 
phase, which involve identifying senior management knowledge, operational 
management knowledge, staff knowledge and creation of threat profiles. Knowledge 
gathering from operational managers’ phase involves identifying key threat 
components and evaluation of selected components. The knowledge gathering from 
staff phase includes risk analysis and the development of protection strategy. 
OCTAVE process output results in the following stages: 
 
? Protection Strategy 
? Mitigation Plan 
? Action List 
 
 
2.6.4 - COBRA 
 
The Consultative, Objective and Bi-functional risk analysis (COBRA) methodology is a 
risk assessment tool that utilizes embedded expert knowledge to generate result for 
self assessment of risk. It was developed in 1991 by C and A Systems Security Ltd for 
risk assessment as a business issue rather than technical issues. Primary knowledge 
base of COBRA includes: 
 
? IT Security (or default) 
? Operational Risk 
? Quick Risk' or 'high level risk' 
? e-Security 
 
2.7 - Summary 
This chapter has been able to cover the project background starting with definition 
of terms that the reader will come across more often as the chapters unfold. A fair 
description of applying BS7799 control subjects to risk areas has also been covered 
so that the reader understands how the Standard guidelines work. Although, we did 
not have access to CRAMM software, there was also a fair description of the CRAMM 
tool working process and how the automated process differs from the manual risk 
scoring matrix. The resolve to use CRAMM Logic has been a backup plan (in case we 
fail to secure access to CRAMM software) and did not hinder the overall aim of the 
project. 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  29 
Chapter 3 
 
Conceptual Model Systems Description 
 
 
3.1 - Introduction 
 
This chapter focuses on the description of our system model including activities, 
participants and dataset obtained from the enterprise used as case study for our 
model. Dataset was obtained through interview questions as part of the Business 
Impact Analysis (BIA). The interview was conducted over a period of three days and 
the major point of contact was the enterprise system administrator who is largely 
responsible for the management of the organization IT systems. This section will also 
allow the reader to understand how our case study scenario is adopted for our 
conceptual model architecture, especially on asset inventory and risk ranking.  
 
 
3.2 - Scope 
 
The enterprise used as a case study for this project is a medium size private college 
in East London called DTK College. The college is under the regulatory directives of 
OFTED and has over 80 staff and students. It is also a certified Prometrics and 
Pearson Vue examination centre. The enterprise has one information system 
department but there is no any security management program currently in place and 
no dedicated CIO for the college. The college has about 60 computers attached to its 
intranet network. It operates on relaxed and loosely enforced corporate policy that 
governs the use of IT resources for personal activities like web browsing, online 
chatting, games and personal emails. The major focus of the management with 
respect to risk awareness among other areas is on virus attacks. As a result of series 
of events that have crippled learning activities, the management recognized the 
need to secure its network and removable storage resources with up to date 
semantic antivirus software. The main participant in this case study is the system 
administrator who is also responsible for the development of the enterprise 
corporate security requirements and security architectural design. He is familiar with 
the security technologies and threats presented in the scope as well as having good 
experience using them. All the resource units and asset classification described 
below are included in the enterprise policy, and mirrored in our model. 
 
 
 
3.3 - Information Asset Classification 
 
Identifying high level information assets that underpin the enterprise business 
process is a first step required in order to grasp a full understanding of the ISMS 
scope. After all, in order to maintain level of protection that is appropriate for 
corporate assets in terms of money, effort and time; we need to understand asset 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  30 
grouping and asset interdependencies within the boundary of our model ISMS. Asset 
Classification Benchmark proposed in [13] was adopted to develop high level 
information asset categorization for the enterprise in our model, shown in figure 4. 
There are six classes/categories of assets are: 
 
Information Asset: this category describes information about the organization that 
has been collected, organized, classified and stored in any form, either printed on 
paper, shown in films or transmitted by post. It also covers electronically stored 
information on computers, servers, websites, mobile phones, USBs and 
electronically transmitted information by any means including email, databases and 
fax. 
 
Software: this category can be divided into two sub-categories: 1) Application 
Software which implements organization business rules, a flaw in such software can 
have adverse impact on the image, reputation and business of the enterprise, hence 
the integrity of such application is vital. 2) System Software, like Operating Systems 
(OS), development tools and Database Management Systems (DBMS). 
 
Physical Assets: this category describes hardware or visible equipments on which 
information can be manipulated; it include: a) Communication Equipments, including 
fixed and mobile telephones, fax machines, routers, EPABXs, modems est. b) 
Computer Equipments including desktops, laptops, servers, mainframe computers, 
PDAs, mobile phones est. c) technical Equipments, which include copper cables CAT 
4 & 5 cables, fiber circuits est. d) Storage Media which include CD-ROMs, magnetic 
backup tapes, USB sticks, DATs est. e) fixtures and furniture. 
 
Services: this category describes critical services on which computer systems 
depend. These include 1) Communication Services like Local Area Network (LAN), 
Wide Area Network (WAN) and value added services. 2) Computing Services like 
outsourced IT support and call centers. 3) Environmental Services which include 
general utilities like air-conditioning, lighting, power and water supplies. 
 
People: this category describes human resources i.e. people with skill, qualification 
and experience that is vital to the organization. 
 
Intangibles: this category describes organization brand image, corporate reputation 
and intellectual property.  
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: High level conceptual model diagram 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  32 
Based on the high level description of asset classification in our model, we will briefly 
describe the low level information and asset interdependencies in our model as 
shown in figure 5. This is to allow the reader to appreciate asset evaluation and risk 
ranking, later on in the report. 
 
? The enterprise in our case study has local ISDN which is connected to the 
local ISP provider. It uses fixed and mobile telephone networks for 
operational purposes. The fixed networks are comprised of series of multiple 
local access networks and are linked together through switches and hubs. 
 
? Lighting Systems: the lighting system is connected to the central unit and it 
uses automated sensors, motion detectors and touch switches in different 
rooms and hallways.  
 
? Intrusion Detection System: burglar alarms and physical locks are used 
throughout the premise. The main entrance is also secured with PIN access 
control system. 
 
? Storage Devices: physical file cabinets and electronic storage systems are in 
use. 
 
? Firewall: the internet gateway is protected by a corporate firewall. 
 
? Servers: various services like email, student information and course material 
databases run on the server. 
 
? Applications: various applications critical to teaching and financial 
accountings are in use e.g. Sage, MS Office suite est. 
 
? Heat-Ventilation-Air condition-Cooling System: centralized heating and 
cooling systems are in use. 
 
? Fire protection system in use is interfaced with other automated systems like 
security lock release under alarm conditions. Basically, the fire alarm system 
takes full advantage of other infrastructure systems through facility 
integration; for instance, HVAC system is integrated with fire alarms to 
automate the opening of exhaust dampers, shutting outdoor air and damping 
the fire floor if there is fire on the floor of the building.  
 
? Security Monitoring and Access Control Systems: there are CCTVs within the 
building and around the perimeter protection to monitor activities of security 
concern.  
 
? Lift and Transportation System: the lift system operates over two floors and it 
is manually controlled. 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Low level conceptual model diagram 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  34 
3.4 - Inventory of major Information Asset 
 
This section presents different types of asset and asset group in our model, it can be 
seen as decomposing the asset classification described in section 3.3. The asset 
inventory shown in table 4 also lists the departments responsible for each asset 
(asset owners) and associated asset threats. The reader will need to refer to the 
catalogue of threats in table 5 in order to understand how threat reference numbers 
are mapped to each asset in our model. The catalogue of threats was compiled as 
proposed in [28] but through the process of the interview conducted, some threats 
were added or removed as appropriate to fit the requirements of our model. 
 
 
Asset  
Group 
Asset Threats Responsibility 
    
Information Personnel 
Files 
1.16, 1.26, 1.28, 1.31, 1.35, 1.36, 1.39, 1.41, 
1.47, 1.48 
HR 
 Bank 
Statements 
1.16, 1.26, 1.28, 1.31, 1.35, 1.36, 1.39, 1.41, 
1.47, 1.48 
Finance 
 Corresponde
nce 
1.12, 1.16, 1.26, 1.28, 1.31, 1.35, 1.36, 1.39, 
1.41, 1.47, 1.48 
HR 
 Financial 
Statements 
1.16, 1.26, 1.28, 1.31, 1.35, 1.36, 1.39, 1.41, 
1.47, 1.48 
Finance 
 Training 
Materials 
1.16, 1.26, 1.28, 1.31, 1.35, 1.36, 1.39, 1.41, 
1.47, 1.48 
HR 
 Emails 1.9,  1.12, 1.16, 1.22 1.28, 1.31, 1.35, 1.36, 
1.17, 1.39, 1.41, 1.47, 1.48 
ALL 
 Electronic 
Data 
1.16, 1.19, 1.28, 1.31, 1.35, 1.36, 1.17, 1.39, 
1.41, 1.47, 1.48 
ALL 
    
Physical  Printers 1.1, 1.11, 1.14, 1.16, 1.17, 1.19, 1.25, 1.39, 
1.44, 1.48 
IT Operations 
 Laptop 
Computers 
1.1, 1.11, 1.16, 1.17, 1.19, 1.22, 1.25, 1.35, 
1.37, 1.39, 1.44, 1.45, 1.48 
IT Operations 
 Desktop 
Computers 
1.1, 1.11, 1.16, 1.17, 1.19, 1.22, 1.25, 1.35, 
1.37, 1.39, 1.44, 1.45, 1.48 
IT Operations 
 Photocopy 
machines 
1.1, 1.11, 1.14,1.16, 1.17, 1.19, 1.25, 1.39, 
1.44, 1.48 
IT Operations 
 Fax Machines 1.1, 1.11, 1.14,1.16, 1.17, 1.19, 1.25,  1.39, 
1.44, 1.48 
IT Operations 
 Fixed 
Telephones 
1.1, 1.6, 1.11, 1.12, 1.14,1.16, 1.17, 1.19, 1.25, 
1.39, 1.44, 1.48 
IT Operations 
 Mobile 
Telephones 
1.1, 1.6, 1.11, 1.12,1.16, 1.17, 1.19, 1.25, 1.39, 
1.44, 1.48 
ALL 
 PDAs 1.1, 1.11, 1.16, 1.17, 1.19, 1.22, 1.25, 1.37, 
1.39, 1.44, 1.48 
ALL 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  35 
 Servers 1.1, 1.11, 1.14, 1.16, 1.17, 1.19, 1.22, 1.25, 
1.35, 1.37, 1.39, 1.44, 1.45, 1.48 
IT Operations 
 Switches and 
Routers 
1.1, 1.11, 1.14, 1.16, 1.17, 1.19,1.37, 1.39, 
1.44, 1.48 
IT Operations 
 Backup 
Media 
1.1, 1.11, 1.14, 1.16, 1.17, 1.19,1.37, 1.39, 
1.44, 1.48 
IT Operations 
 USBs 1.1, 1.11, 1.16, 1.19,1.37, 1.39, 1.44, 1.48 ALL 
 Modems 1.1, 1.11, 1.14, 1.16, 1.17, 1.19, 1.22, 1.25, 
1.35, 1.37, 1.39, 1.44, 1.45, 1.48 
IT Operations 
 Mainframe 
Computers 
1.1, 1.11, 1.16, 1.17, 1.19, 1.22, 1.25, 1.35, 
1.37, 1.39, 1.44, 1.45, 1.48 
IT Operations 
    
Software Application 
Software 
1.28, 1.37, 1.46, 1.48 IT Operations 
 Logical 
Software 
1.28, 1.37, 1.46, 1.48 IT Operations 
    
People  People 1.18, 1.21, 1.22, 1.24, 1.31, 1.33, 1.35, 1.38, 
1.39, 1.43, 1.45 
HR 
    
Services Smoke 
detector 
1.1, 1.3, 1.7, 1.13, 1.16, 1.18, , 1.48 Site Services 
 Gas 
detectors 
1.1, 1.3, 1.7, 1.13, 1.16, 1.18, , 1.48 Site Services 
 Heating 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.7, 1.9, 1.10, 1.13, 1.14, 1.16, 
1.17,  1.27, 1.33, 1.34 
Site Services 
 Air 
Conditioning 
1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.7, 1.10, 1.13, 1.14, 1.16, 1.17,  
1.27, 1.33, 1.34, 1.48 
Site Services 
 LAN 1.3, 1.4, 1.6, 1.9, 1.12, 1,13, 1.14, 1.30, 1.40, 
1.48 
IT Operations 
 Telephone 
System 
1.1, 1.6, 1.11, 1.12, 1.14,1.16, 1.17, 1.19, 1.25, 
1.39, 1.44, 1.48 
IT Operations 
 Electricity 
Supply 
1.3, 1.13, 1.14, 1.16, 
 
Site Services 
 Water Supply 1.1, 1.3, 1.10, 1.13, 1.15, 1.17, 1.48 Site Services 
 UPSs 1.1, 1.3, 1.10, 1.13, 1.17, 1.48 IT Operations 
 CCTV 1.3, 1.6 1.13, 1.14, 1.16, 1,41, 1.48 Site Services 
 Elevator 1.3, 1.6 1.13, 1.14, 1.16, 1,40, 1.48 Site Services 
    
Intangibles  
(Image & 
Reputation) 
Public 
Confidence 
1.3, 1.5, 1.10,  1.15, 1.18, 1.23, 1.33, 1.38, 
1.39, 1.47, 1.48 
Corporate & 
Communications 
 Customers 
Confidence 
1.3, 1.5, 1.10,  1.15, 1.18, 1.23, 1.33, 1.38, 
1.39, 1.47, 1.48 
Corporate & 
Communications 
 Suppliers 
Confidence 
1.3, 1.5, 1.10,  1.15, 1.18, 1.23, 1.33, 1.38, 
1.39, 1.47, 1.48 
Corporate & 
Communications 
Table 5: Inventory of Assets 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  36 
 
 
 
Ref Threat Ref Threat 
1.1  Airborne particles/dust 1.2  Air conditioning failure 
1.3  Bomb Attack 1.4  Wireless communications infiltration 
1.5  Cryptographic Compromise 1.6  Damage to communication lines 
1.7  Deterioration of storage media 1.8  Earthquake 
1.9  Eavesdropping 1.10  Environmental contamination (and other forms 
of natural or man-made disasters) 
1.11  Extremes of temperature and 
humility 
1.12  Burglary 
1.13  Failure of network components 1.14  Failure of power supply 
1.15   Unauthorized email access 1.16  Fire 
1.17  Flooding 1.18  Fraud/Embezzlement 
1.19  Loss of data 1.20  Hurricane 
1.21  Illegal import/export of 
software 
1.22  Password Nabbing 
1.23  Industrial action 1.24  IP Spoofing 
1.25  Lightning 1.26  Logic Bomb 
1.27  Unauthorized  removal of 
equipment 
1.28  Malicious software e.g. viruses, worms 
1.29  Masquerading of user identity 1.30  Misrouting or rerouting of messages 
1.31  Document Compromise 1.32  Unauthorized Network access 
1.33  Operational support staff error 1.34  Power fluctuation 
1.35  Personal computer misuse 1.36  Non-repudiation e.g. services, transactions 
1.37  Software failure 1.38  Staff shortage 
1.39  Theft 1.40  Traffic overloading 
1.41  Transmission errors 1.42  Web page spoofing 
1.43  Unauthorized use of storage 
media 
1.44  Unauthorized use of network facilities   
1.45  Use of software by 
unauthorized users 
1.46  Use of software in an unauthorized way 
1.47  User error 1.48  Willful damage 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.5 - Initial Risk Ranking Order 
 
After identifying potential threats that constitute risk to the assets in our model, the 
next step is to rank the threats in order of importance as shown in table 7. This 
exercise was conducted with the system administrator who was able to identify and 
Table 6: Catalogue of threats 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  37 
select threats that constitute potential risk to the organization, and ranked the 
threats based on the management perception of threat exposure (relevant threats 
were selected from the catalogue of threats in table 6).  
 
The ranking of risk exercise was combined with the risk assessment interview in 
order to understand the organization’s current state of affair with respect to risk 
management. The questionnaire is structured to mirror general enterprise process 
flow. It is on this platform that we shall refine, asses and manage the organization 
ISMS by applying the two risk assessment methodologies discussed earlier (BS7799 
and CRAMM Logic). Sample interview question form is included in appendix A, the 
interview questions were designed as proposed in [29], [30] and [31]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ref Threat Initial 
Ranking 
1.28 Malicious software e.g. viruses, worms 1 
1.35 Personal computer misuse 2 
1.37 Software failure 3 
1.22 Password Nabbing 4 
1.32 Unauthorized Network Access 5 
1.39 Theft 6 
1.47 User error 7 
1.29 Masquerading of user identity 8 
1.4 Wireless communications infiltration 9 
1.13 Failure of network components 10 
1.44 Unauthorized use of network facilities   11 
1.31 Document Compromise 12 
1.14 Failure of power supply 13 
1.19 Loss of data 14 
1.15 Unauthorized email access 15 
1.6 Damage to communication lines 16 
1.12 Burglary 17 
1.43 Unauthorized use of storage media 18 
1.24 IP Spoofing 19 
1.48 Willful damage 20 
1.2 Air conditioning failure 21 
1.16 Fire 22 
1.36 Non-repudiation e.g. services, transactions 23 
1.27 Unauthorized  removal of equipment 24 
1.17 Flooding 25 
1.18 Fraud/Embezzlement 26 
Table 7: Initial risk ranking table 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  38 
3.6 - Summery 
 
In this chapter, we have been able map the assets in our case study to design our 
conceptual model. We have been able to understand what constitutes asset and 
how assets are categorized. Most importantly, we have been able to show asset 
grouping, interdependencies and owners (responsibilities) in our conceptual model; 
including the enterprise perception of risk and the ranking of threats. Through the 
interview process, we have been able to establish the initial risk ranking, according 
to the management priorities. In the next chapter, we shall carry out risk assessment 
of our model (smart infrastructure) based on the 26 identified initial risks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  39 
Chapter 4 
 
Implementation of Threat Assessment 
 
 
4.1 - Introduction 
 
All the work described so far in this thesis has been a subtle guide to this chapter 
where our two threat assessment methodologies are implemented. This chapter 
focuses on mitigating only the high risk areas identified in our model and the initial 
risk ranking order discussed in the last chapter. Two assumptions are of key 
importance here so that time is not wasted dealing with what has been covered 
previously and our reader can follow this report appropriately. The two risk 
assessment methodologies required that we start with: 1) the scope of the 
organization, 2) identify key asset and risks; all of these requirements have been 
largely addressed in section 3.2, section 3.4 and section 3.5 respectively.  
 
 
4.2 - Applying BS7799-2:2002 Methodology 
 
Based on the procedure outlined in the British Standard [21] and at section 2.5.1 of 
this report, this section shows how we apply BS7799-2 control subject to mitigate 
the risks shown in the initial risk ranking order on table 7. The aim of applying 
BS7799 methodology is to mitigate those risks either by avoidance (A), detection & 
recovery (D), reduction of threat (R), transfer (T), reduction of vulnerability (V). Since 
Standards only provide outlines of what should be achieved rather than showing 
how things should be done, we will assume that the technologies chosen to 
accomplish the control strategies in the standards are appropriate for our expected 
outcomes/results. 
 
Table 8 shows how each risk is addressed by applying the appropriate clause and 
control object of BS7799-2. For each risk identified on the initial risk ranking table, 
the control subject is mapped with the strategy use to mitigate the risk, i.e. the 
actions taken; technology or policy wise as well as values showing risk control 
expected outcomes. Expected outcome for each strategy depends on individual 
organization risk acceptance level, rather than the risk the strategy mitigates. Based 
on the interview conducted in our case study, the expected outcomes shown on 
table 8 were considered appropriate for the college.  
 
After applying selected BS7799 control strategies, we are required to adhere to the 
PCDA model cycle of activities by documenting, reinforcing and improving the 
enterprise security with time. By applying these control strategies, we will assume 
that the effectiveness of the applied controls is always checked. If there is any 
significant change in the scope of the enterprise, effectiveness of the controls can 
change as well, and the process has to be repeated. 
 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  40 
Risk BS7799-2:2002 
Clause 
BS7799-2:2002 
Control Subject 
Strategy Expected 
Outcome 
Malicious software e.g. 
viruses, worms 
A.8.3.1 Controls against 
malicious 
software 
Detection and prevention controls to protect against 
malicious software and appropriate user awareness 
procedures shall be implemented. 
A, R 
Personal computer 
misuse 
A.12.1.5 Prevention of misuse 
of 
information 
processing 
facilities 
Management shall authorize the use of information 
processing facilities and controls shall be applied to 
prevent the misuse of such facilities. 
A 
Software failure A.6.3.3 Reporting software 
malfunctions 
Procedures shall be established for reporting software 
malfunctions. 
D, R, V 
Password Nabbing A.9.3.1 Password use Users shall be required to follow good security practices 
in the selection and use of passwords. 
A 
Unauthorized Network 
Access 
A.9.4.9 Security of network 
services 
A clear description of the security attributes of all 
network services used by the organization shall be 
provided. 
A, R 
Theft A.7.1.3 Securing offices, 
rooms 
and facilities 
Secure areas shall be created in order to protect offices, 
rooms and facilities with special security requirements. 
A 
User error A.10.2.1 Input data validation Data input to application systems shall be validated to 
ensure that it is correct and appropriate. 
A, R 
Masquerading of user 
identity 
A.9.5.3 User identification 
and 
authentication 
All users shall have a unique identifier (user ID) for 
their personal and sole use so that activities can be 
traced to the responsible individual. A suitable 
authentication technique shall be chosen to 
substantiate the claimed identity of a user. 
A, R, V 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  41 
Wireless 
communications 
infiltration 
A.9.8.1 Mobile computing A formal policy shall be in place and appropriate 
controls shall be adopted to protect against the risks of 
working with mobile computing facilities, in particular 
in unprotected environments. 
A, R, V 
Failure of network 
components 
A.8.4.3 Fault logging Faults shall be reported and corrective action taken. R, V 
Unauthorized use of 
network facilities   
A.9.4.8 Network routeing 
control 
Shared networks shall have routeing controls to ensure 
that computer connections and information flows do 
not 
breach the access control policy of the business 
applications. 
A, R, V 
Document 
Compromise 
A.12.1.4 Data protection and 
privacy of personal 
information 
Controls shall be applied to protect personal 
information in accordance with relevant legislation. 
A, R, V, D 
Failure of power supply A.7.2.2 Power supplies Equipment shall be protected from power failures and 
other electrical anomalies. 
A, R 
Loss of data A.8.4.1 Information back-up Back-up copies of essential business information and 
software shall be taken and tested regularly. 
A, R, V, D 
Unauthorized email 
access 
A.8.7.4 Security of electronic 
mail 
A policy for the use of electronic mail shall be developed 
and controls put in place to reduce security risks 
created by electronic mail. 
A, R, V 
Damage to 
communication lines 
A.7.2.3 Cabling security Power and telecommunications cabling carrying data or 
supporting information services shall be protected from 
interception or damage. 
A, R, V, T 
Burglary A.7.1.1 Physical security 
perimeter 
Organizations shall use security perimeters to protect 
areas that contain information processing facilities. 
A, R 
Unauthorized use of A.8.6.1 Management of The management of removable computer media, such A, R 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  42 
storage media removable 
computer media 
as tapes, disks, cassettes and printed reports shall be 
controlled. 
IP Spoofing A.9.4.3 User authentication 
for 
external connections 
Access by remote users shall be subject to 
authentication. 
A, R, V 
Willful damage A.7.2.1 Equipment siting and 
protection 
Equipment shall be sited or protected to reduce the 
risks from environmental threats and hazards, and 
opportunities for unauthorized access. 
A, R, V 
Air conditioning failure A.6.3.4 Learning from 
incidents 
Mechanisms shall be put in place to enable the types, 
volumes and costs of incidents and malfunctions to be 
quantified and monitored. 
A 
Fire A.7.2.1 Equipment siting and 
protection 
Equipment shall be sited or protected to reduce the 
risks from environmental threats and hazards, and 
opportunities for unauthorized access 
A, T 
Non-repudiation e.g. 
services, transactions 
A.10.3.4 Non-repudiation 
services 
Non-repudiation services shall be used to resolve 
disputes about occurrence or non-occurrence of an 
event or action. 
A, R, V 
Unauthorized  removal 
of equipment 
A.7.3.2 Removal of property Equipment, information or software belonging to the 
organization shall not be removed without 
authorization of the management. 
A, R, V, D 
Flooding A.7.2.1 Equipment siting and 
protection 
Equipment shall be sited or protected to reduce the 
risks from environmental threats and hazards, and 
opportunities for unauthorized access. 
A, R, V, D 
Fraud/Embezzlement A.6.1.3 Confidentiality 
agreements 
Employees shall sign a confidentiality agreement as 
part of their initial terms and conditions of 
employment. 
A, R 
Table 8: BS7799 Controls 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  43 
4.3 - Applying CRAMM Logic Methodology 
 
Applying CRAMM logic to our model involves a 4-phase approach: the first phase is 
the scope i.e. information gathering and business process which has been described 
in section 3.2.  
 
The second phase is to identify and prioritize the high-risk business areas and 
evaluate the business impact, this will be based on the initial risk ranking discussed 
section 3.5, table 7. Using the risk scoring matrix process described in section 2.5.2.2, 
we calculate the measure of risk for each threat ranked in table 7 and re-order the 
risks (or prioritize the risk) based on the risk scoring matrix. The reader need to recall 
that, likelihood of risk and severity of risk values are obtained as part of the risk 
assessment interview process. Table 9 Show the final ranking of threat by measure 
of risks, after the risk scoring process. Based on the new ranking of risk (the gross 
risk), we now select the risks with high scoring ration, which require immediate 
action. We assume that these are the risks that are clearly above the organization 
risk acceptance level. The reader can recall that it was explained in section 1.2 that it 
is not every risk that is worth the time and resources to control; it could be more 
economically viable to leave controlled or manageable risks if they are below 
organization risk acceptance level and cannot be of any significant harm.  
 
Next in phase three, we shall apply mitigating controls or countermeasures to the 10 
identified high risk areas in our model (prioritized gross risk), table 9 shows the 
highlighted top 10 risk area, while table 10 shows selected countermeasures and the 
effectiveness of each risk mitigating controls (measure of risks after implementing 
controls). The method of applying precise CRAMM countermeasure is a 3 step 
process: a) asset classes associated with countermeasures are compared to the asset 
classes to which individual component of an asset depends b) if a match is identified, 
the next step is to ascertain that recommendations of the countermeasure are 
sufficient enough to justify the asset measure of risk c) for each pairing of relevant 
threat/asset, the CRAMM software then compares the threat/asset pairing 
associated with the measure of risk to the maximum security level associated with 
each countermeasure that protects against the threat. As stated earlier, CRAMM 
software comes with over 3000 library of detailed countermeasures organized into 
over 70 logical grouping. However, since we do not have access to the CRAMM 
software, which could have automated the process of risk scoring and 
countermeasure recommendations, we had to rely on CRAMM 5.1 user guide and 
brainstorming for the risk mitigation controls identification process. It is important to 
point out here that CRAMM v5.1 user guide [32] contains detailed 
threat/countermeasure group table that shows which threat each countermeasure 
group combats. 
 
The forth phase (in a real world situation) is to include recommendation of 
countermeasures in the enterprise business continuity plan (BCA), but it is not within 
the context of this work. It is apparent from the risk analysis with CRAMM Logic that 
effective measurement of ISMS is an onerous task, which requires an honest and 
realistic approach. There must be a balanced assessment of the likelihood and 
significance of threat based on recommended risk mitigating controls [33]. 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  44 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ref Risk Initial 
Threat 
Ranking 
Likelihood 
(Value of L)  
1 - 5 
Severity 
(Value of S)  
1 - 15 
Measure 
of Risk 
(L * S) 
Risk 
Classification 
Final 
Threat 
Ranking 
1.35 Personal computer misuse 2 5 10 50 High Risk 1 
1.47 User error 7 3 15 45 High Risk 2 
1.28 Malicious software e.g. viruses, worms 1 4 10 40 High Risk 3 
1.16 Fire 22 3 10 30 Moderate Risk 4 
1.44 Unauthorized use of network facilities   11 3 10 30 Moderate Risk 5 
1.32 Unauthorized Network Access 5 3 10 30 Moderate Risk 6 
1.37 Software failure 3 2 15 30 Moderate Risk 7 
1.19 Loss of data 13 2 10 20 Moderate Risk 8 
1.22 Password Nabbing 4 2 10 20 Moderate Risk 9 
1.27 Unauthorized  removal of equipment 24 3 5 15 Moderate Risk 10 
1.12 Burglary 17 2 5 10 Low Risk 11 
1.39 Theft 6 2 5 10 Low Risk 12 
1.29 Masquerading of user identity 8 1 10 10 Low Risk 13 
1.24 IP Spoofing 19 2 5 10 Low Risk 14 
1.31 Document Compromise 12 1 10 10 Low Risk 15 
1.15 Unauthorized email access 15 2 5 10 Low Risk 16 
1.48 Willful damage 20 2 5 10 Low Risk 17 
1.4 Wireless communications infiltration 9 1 10 10 Low Risk 18 
1.36 Non-repudiation e.g. services, transact 23 3 2 6 Low Risk 19 
1.2 Air conditioning failure 21 1 5 5 Low Risk 20 
1.18 Fraud/Embezzlement 26 1 5 5 Low Risk 21 
1.43 Unauthorized use of storage media 18 2 2 4 Very Low Risk 22 
1.6 Damage to communication lines 16 2 2 4 Very Low Risk 23 
1.14 Failure of power supply 13 2 2 4 Very Low Risk 24 
1.13 Failure of network components 10 1 2 2 Very Low Risk 25 
1.18 Flood 25 1 2 2 Very Low Risk 26 
Table 9: Measure of risk and final threat ranking 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  45 
Ref Risk Countermeasures Pre-Control 
implementation 
(Likelihood 1-5) 
Post-Control 
implementation 
(Likelihood 1-5) 
Post-Control 
implementation 
(Severity 1-15) 
Measure 
of Risk 
(L * S) 
Risk 
Classification 
1.35 Personal 
computer 
misuse 
Identification and 
Authentication 
Logical Access Control 
System Administration 
Controls 
Security Education and 
Training 
Security Policy 
Compliance Checks 
5 3 10 30 Moderate 
Risk 
1.47 User error Logical Access Control 
User Control 
Application Input/output 
Controls 
Back-up of Data 
3 2 15 30 Moderate 
Risk 
1.28 Malicious 
software e.g. 
viruses, worms 
Protection Against 
Malicious Software 
Detection of Malicious 
Software 
Removal of Malicious 
Software 
Network Access Controls 
Mobile Code Protection 
4 3 10 30 Moderate 
Risk 
1.16 Fire Fire Detection 
Fire Evacuation 
Fire Prevention 
Suppression and Control 
3 1 10 10 Low Risk 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  46 
Insurance 
Back-up of Data 
1.44 Unauthorized 
use of network 
facilities   
Diagnostic and Control 
Equipment 
Distribution and 
Termination Equipment 
Protecting Cabling against 
Physical Damage 
Authenticating Wireless 
Devices 
Encryption of Wireless 
Traffic 
3 1 10 10 Low Risk 
1.32 Unauthorized 
Network Access 
Authenticating Wireless 
Devices 
Encryption of Wireless 
Traffic 
Application Authentication 
Node Authentication 
Remote Diagnostic Port 
Protection 
Network Connection 
Control 
Gateway/Firewall Policy 
and Procedures 
3 2 10 20 Moderate 
Risk 
1.37 Software failure Software Integrity 
Software Maintenance 
Controls 
Back-up of Data 
2 1 15 15 Moderate 
Risk 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  47 
1.19 Loss of data Recovery Option for Hosts 
Recovery Options for 
Network Services 
Back-up of Data 
Equipment Failure 
Protection 
Data Protection 
Management Structure 
2 1 10 10 Low Risk 
1.22 Password 
Nabbing 
Identification of a User by 
Token or Biometric Devices 
Frequency of Password 
Change 
Workstation Identification 
User Authentication for 
External Connections 
Password Length 
Password Storage 
Password Generation 
2 1 10 10 Low Risk 
1.27 Unauthorized  
removal of 
equipment 
Back-up of Data 
Room / Zone Physical 
Security 
Theft Protection 
Physical Equipment 
Protection 
Incident Handling 
Compliance Checks 
3 1 5 5 Very Low 
Risk 
Table 10: CRAMM Controls 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  48 
Chapter 5 
 
Results and Analysis 
 
This section discusses our findings based on the application of both risk assessment 
methodologies to our model. 
 
BS7799: It can be said that relevant control subjects have been applied as specified 
in the Standard; input to loss of confidentiality, integrity and availability on all assets 
were collectively considered for each risk, rather than treating each risk based on 
confidentiality, integrity or availability. However, the Standard did not include any 
specific technology needed to apply the control subjects. We assumed that selected 
technology (based on management decisions) will be appropriate enough to mitigate 
identified risk; if found to be ineffective, then the process is repeated. 
 
CRAMM: by applying CRAMM Logic, we can see the efficiency and measurability of 
risk mitigating controls from the differences in gross risk and net risk maps shown in 
figure 6 and figure 8 respectively. We had to consider some important metrics i.e. 
measure of risk before and after applying countermeasures; based on this 
information, we will be able to create a net risk map showing the net risk exposure 
for the organization [34].  It can be seen from the risk management chart shown in 
figure 7, that there is a considerable drop in the likelihood of each instance of risk 
after applying controls to mitigate the risk. We also assumed that after applying 
controls to each risk, it is not possible to measure any considerable change in the 
significance of each risk, hence the metric for risk significance is constant. Any 
change in the metric of likelihood of risk, affects the overall measure of risk for that 
particular instance of risk. 
 
 
Significance 
Figure 6: Gross Risk Map 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  49 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
After the implementation of CRAMM Logic risk mitigating controls, the total 
percentage of risks classified as ‘High Risk’, based on the measure of risk was 
reduced by 30%, this represents a drop from 30% in the pre-implementation stage to 
0% in the post implementation stage. Similarly, the total percentage of risks 
classified as ‘Moderate Risk’ was also reduced by 20%, this represents a drop from 
70% in the pre-implementation stage to 50% in the post implementation stage. 
However, there was a 50% increase in the lower categories of risk (i.e. ‘Low Risk’ and 
Significance 
Significance 
Figure 7: Risk Management 
Figure 8: Net Risk Map 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  50 
‘Very Low Risk’), which were not present at all in the selected gross risks before 
applying risk countermeasures. This represents 40% and 10% of risks classified as 
‘Low Risk’ and ‘Very Low Risk’ respectively. See the pre-implementation and post-
implementation charts shown in figure 9 and figure 10 respectively. It was 
considered that severity of risk either before or after countermeasures remain 
unchanged, since any significant improvement to the likelihood of risk results in a 
more acceptable gross or residual risk. 
 
Figure 9: Pre mitigation risk ratio 
Figure 10: Post mitigation risk ratio 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  51 
Chapter 6 
 
Conclusion and Discussion 
 
Generally speaking, risk is inevitable in any organization and to a larger extent; risk is 
a constant feature of any business process. However only manageable risk should be 
allowed and this can only be measured through risk analysis. Risk analysis and 
management provide organizations with a clearer picture of the impact of risk and 
the cost of avoiding such risk. It prevents imbalance in the amount of time and 
resources expended on avoiding risks of minor potential impact or ignoring risks all 
together in the hope that they never happen.  
 
Arguably, the most significant potential impact to organizations would be the ability 
to measure the effectiveness of selected controls in BS7799. Achieving compliance 
with security Standard BS7799 is a substantially daunting task and operationally 
intensive process. It is clear from the scope of the conceptual model we worked on 
that, establishing the current compliance position of every information system 
within the scope is a painstaking process; it is actually much harder if the same 
approach is extended to a larger organization. Again, application of security Standard 
is too generic, since Standards are designed to be applicable to any organization 
irrespective of sizes, type and nature of operation or business.  
 
BS7799 is a risk management methodology that produces relative result without any 
relationship for comparing the results; it is basically geared towards ranking of risks. 
The metric (or measurement) with regards to the BS7799 Standard is just to 
ascertain whether an organization is compliant with a Standard or an organization 
meets the specifications defined in a Standard. A BS7799 Standard is not necessarily 
concerned about the security of organization asset in the same sense as CRAMM 
assessment tool. The Standard is simply providing broad guidelines, for instance, 
encryption of portable devices – However, whether the encryption is successful or 
not is not really addressed. A device may be encrypted to fulfill the requirement of 
the guidelines by using lower key length encryption like ‘00000000’, which may be 
broken easily with the simplest form of brute force attack; or in the case of 
password, the same password may be used across all the devices, which implies that 
breaking the security scheme on one device is as good as having access to the rest of 
the devices. The bottom line is that, BS7799 does not account for the scale of 
security controls and it is difficult to measure the effectiveness of security guidelines 
in the Standard. 
 
Even more, in situations where there is available expertise to implement the best 
technology in line with BS7799 security controls and as appropriate for the right 
platform with the best security principle, problem still exists because such 
technology is not embedded in Standards (which cannot be) as a result of changes in 
technology over the years. Standards are meant to be something that is enduring but 
as technology changes, the guideline used to encrypt all the devices will still be the 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  52 
same (since guidelines are not review at the same rate of technology change) 
whether what is used is Triple Des, AES or simply applying Higher key sizes.  
 
Risk assessment tools on the other hand have the tendency to be tailored to the 
security and applicable regulatory requirement of each organization. Based on the 
analysis of our results, the most efficient and capital effective approach to achieving 
compliance is through a database software product, in our case; CRAMM. It became 
quickly obvious that achieving full compliance can be realized with minimum pain 
and simplified assessment process. It is possible to quickly identify areas of risk and 
resources required to mitigate the risks as well as providing a strong business case to 
justify and maximize the effectiveness of expenditure in information security. 
CRAMM takes into account the peculiarity of each organization security requirement 
and provide appropriate countermeasure to mitigate the risk. CRAMM, unlike 
BS7799, produces results that are both measureable and comparable. It provides a 
calculation-based approach to comparing how much greater one risk is over the 
other. 
 
More often there are usually appreciable levels of security controls already adopted 
by most organizations like good physical security or anti-virus procedures. However, 
when the probe on justifying selected controls or how the risk such controls mitigate 
is being measured, then we hit the bricks. In this current era of escalating identity 
fraud, corporate scandal and IT costs; the driver behind risk management should 
transcend beyond identification and implementation of controls to mitigate risks but 
it should also be about the measurement of each control, relative to risks. After all, if 
controls cannot be measured, how possible is it to demonstrate that any 
improvement has been made or the controls are working effectively.  
 
One key and important recommendation of this report is that; even if the 
organization modeled in this project already holds certification to BS7799 or ISO 
27001, it is suggested that proceedings should be commenced on establishing a 
clearly defined set of security control measurements.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  53 
Chapter 7 
 
Future Work 
 
The risk assessment procedure has been completed in line with the objectives set 
out at the beginning of this project; however, due to unavailability of some specific 
resources, time constraints, supervisor’s advice and the interim report feedback, 
there have been few modifications to the project objectives. Outlined below are 
some of the areas that can be included as part of future work for this project: 
 
? Develop a larger conceptual model: the conceptual model used for this work is a 
bit narrow. It would be more interesting to see a complex model which can 
reflect a more in-depth IT infrastructure and information systems. 
 
? Security Management Standards: the Standard considered for this work is 
BS7799, but as stated in the report, there are more that can be used. As part of 
the future work for this project, it would be better if more information security 
Standards are used or compared as part of requirement guidelines to secure our 
model. 
 
? Risk assessment tools: there are also a lot more software based risk assessment 
tools other than CRAMM, as part of the future work, more than one software 
tool could be used for risk assessment of our model. Likewise, it would be 
interesting to see the output of CRAMM automated process rather than relying 
on calculations by hand (CRAMM Logic).  
 
? Case Study: as part of future wok, it would be nice if the risk assessment can 
actually be carried out on the enterprise used as a case study. In addition, the 
work can eliminate unsuitable methodologies and propose recommendation to 
organizations facing the daunting task of determining appropriate methodology. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  54 
References 
 
[1] Eloff, J. H. P., Labuschagne, L. and Badenhorst, K. P. A Comparative Framework 
for Risk Analysis Methods. Computer Security, 12, 6 1993), 597-603. 
[2] Rossouw von, S. Information Security Management (3): the Code of Practice for 
Information Security Management (BS 7799). Information Management & Computer 
Security, 6, 5 1998), 224-225. 
 
[3] Corporation, L. Regulatory Compliance and Critical System Protection: The Role of 
Mission-Critical Power and Cooling in Data Integrity and Availability. Emerson 
Network Power2005), 1-20. 
[4] Kissel, R. Glossary of information Security Terms. National Institute of Standard 
and Technology. NIST IR 7298 Revision 1, 2011), 4-211. 
[5] Geric, S. and Hutinski, Z. Information System Security Threats Classifications. 
Journal of information and organizational sciences, Volume 31, Number 1 (2007) 
[6] Alhabeeb, M., Almuhaideb, A., Dung, P. and Srinivasan B. Information Security 
Threats Classification Pyramid. IEEE 24th International Conference on Advanced 
Information Networking and Applications Workshops, 2010. 
[7] Bonnette, A. C. Assessing Threats to Information Security in Financial Institutions. 
SANS Institute InfoSec Reading Room2003). 
[8] Lihong, Z., Ana, V. and Miguel, N. Supporting decision making in risk management 
through an evidence-based information systems project risk checklist. Information 
Management & Computer Security, 16, 2 2008), 166-186. 
[9] Elky, S. An Introduction to Information System Risk Management. SANS Institute 
InfoSec Reading Room2006).  
 
[10] deRu, W. G. and Eloff, J. H. P. Risk analysis modelling with the use of fuzzy logic. 
Comput Secur, 15, 3 1996), 239-248. 
[11] Straub, D. W. and Welke, R. J. Coping with systems risk: security planning 
models for management decision making. MIS Q., 22, 4 1998), 441-469. 
[12] ASYCUNDA, Risk Management. UNCTAD 2000 [online], available at 
www.asycuda.org/slideshows/risk.ppt [accessed on] 10/August/2011 
[13] Calder, A. and GWatkins, S. Information Security Risk Management for 
ISO270001-270002, IT Governance Publishing, Cambridgeshire 2010. 
[14] General Accounting Office (GOA). Information Security Risk Assessment - 
Practices of Leading Organizations: A Supplement to GAO’s May 1998 Executive 
Guide on Information Security Management. GAO/AIMD-00-33) 1999 
 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  55 
[15] Carey, P. Data Protection: A Practical Guide to UK and EU Law, Third Edition, 
Oxford University Press, 2009. 
[16] Vassilis, T. and Theodore, T. From risk analysis to effective security 
management: towards an automated approach. Information Management & 
Computer Security, 12, 1 2004), 91-101. 
 
[17] Information Technology Governance, Information Security and ISO27001 – An 
Introduction. IT Governance Ltd 1.1) 2006. 
[18] CRAMM 5 Case Study Datasheet. Risk Analysis Consultants) 2010. 
[19] Business Link, Understanding BS7799. Department of Trade and Industry 
[online], available at http://www.connectingsomerset.co.uk/tips/e-
business/Understanding%20BS%207799.pdf [accessed on] 3/August/2011. 
[20] Siponen, M. and Willison, R. Information Security Management Standards: 
Problems and solutions. Information & Management, 46, 5 2009), 267-270. 
[21] British Standard 7799 Part 2 (September 2002), Information Technology – 
Specification for Information Security Management System, BSI, London. 
[22] Spinellis, D., Kokolakis, S. and Gritzalis, S. Security requirements, risks and 
recommendations for small enterprise and home-office environments. Information 
Management & Computer Security, 7, 3 1999), 121-128. 
[23] Siemens Enterprise. CRAMM v5.1 Information Security Toolkit (Datasheet). 
2005. 
 
[24] Yazar, Z. A Qualitative Risk Analysis and Management Tool - CRAMM. SANS 
Institute InfoSec Reading Room2002), 1-15. 
[25] Siemens Enterprise. The Logic behind CRAMM’s Assessment of Measures of Risk 
and Determination of Appropriate Countermeasures. Siemens Enterprise, City, 2005. 
[26] West Essex PCT -Risk Assessment Procedure and Guideline Version 2, February 
2010 
[27] Humphreys, E. Information Security Management Standards: Compliance, 
governance and risk management. Information Security Technical Report, 13, 4 
2008), 247-255. 
[28] Risk Assessment Manual v1.4 [online], available at 
https://www.igt.connectingforhealth.nhs.uk/KnowledgeBaseNew/ISMS%20Risk%20
Assessment%20Manual%20v1.4.pdf [accessed on] 22/August/2011. 
[29] PCI Security Standards Council LLC. Self-Assessment Questionnaire D and 
Attestation of Compliance, v2.0) 2010. 
 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  56 
[30] Open Information Systems Security Group. Information Systems Security 
Assessment Framework (ISSAF) Draft 0.2) 2006. 
 
[31] AIG Net Advantage Modular Edition. Information Security and Privacy Self-
Assessment, Version 4.1. AIG Executive Liability) 2009. 
 
[32] CRAMM v5.1 User’s Guide [online], available at 
http://dtps.unipi.gr/files/notes/2007-
2008/eksamino_5/politikes_kai_diaxeirish_asfaleias/egxeiridio_cramm.pdf 
[accessed on] 2/September/2011 
[33] Wright, S. White Paper - Measuring the Effectiveness of Security using ISO27001 
Version 1.8) 2006. 
[34] Lowendahl J., Antonsen M., Everbrand J. And Lidros J. A Successful Tool to 
Create Positive Change: Results of an I.T Risk Assessment and Benchmark. 
Transcendent Group (2005). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tesleem Fagade: Advanced Computing - Internet Technologies with Security (MSc)  57 
Appendix A 
 
Questionnaire 
 
 
 
Risk Assessment Questionnaire 
Ref  Y/Comments N/Comments N/A 
1 Do you have information retention 
policy 
   
2 Do you have security awareness 
and training program in place 
   
3 Do you have password management 
policy in place 
   
4 Do you have access control policy to 
sensitive resources  
   
5 Do you secure connections to the 
college network from 
wireless/mobile devices 
   
6 Do you have established firewall 
and router configuration standards  
   
7 Do you outsource any security 
management programme to a third 
party 
   
8 Do you have virus protection 
programme in place 
   
9 Do you maintain a policy that 
addresses information security for 
all personnel 
   
10 Do you have information security 
and privacy policy 
   
11 Do you have physical security policy 
in place 
   
12 Do you have policies in place to 
comply with privacy requirement of 
your standard regulatory body 
   
