wAbstract
With the increasing severity of malware problem, this project aims at con-
structing computer models which are specialized to the defense against mal-
ware proliferation and providing some useful advice on what strategies should
be deployed in different malware scenarios. The project is the combination
of 70% theoretical investigation and 30% software implementation. We did
much research on malware spread mechanism, epidemiology modeling with
topology consideration, and game theory. Then, based on existing models
and algorithms, we developed theoretical models to simulate malware propa-
gation behavior and constructed cost-benefit models to carry out cost-benefit
analysis. Finally, we developed computer models and analyzed real worms.
We list several achievements as follows:
• We worked out the scale-free network parameter by using mean field
approximation, see pages 21-22.
• We combined epidemiology models with strategy making analysis and
the scale-free network parameter to construct game theoretical models,
see pages 22-25.
• We deployed the same methods used in the “FLIPIT” game to con-
struct cost-benefit models, see pages 25-28.
• By integrating all models, we found out the way to determine the best
strategy, see pages 29-31.
• We developed computer models by implementing them in Matlab, see
pages 30-32.
• Based on the analysis of real worms, we summarized some key obser-
vations which can help defenders choose the best strategy, see pages
33-50.
Contents
1 Introduction 3
1.1 Aims and Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
1.1.1 Model Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
1.1.2 Analysis Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
1.2 Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2 Background and Context 6
2.1 Malware Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
2.2 General Description of Epidemiology Models . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.3 Topology Consideration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
2.4 Game Theory in Malware Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
2.4.1 Why Use Game Theory in Malware Analysis . . . . . . 12
2.4.2 Brief Introduction to Game Theory . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.4.3 “FLIPIT” Game . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3 Models and Methods 19
3.1 Mathematical Specification of Standard Epidemiology Models 19
3.1.1 The SIR Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.1.2 The SIS Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.2 Topology Consideration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.3 Game Theoretical Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.3.1 Strategy Making Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.3.2 Patch Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.3.3 Removal Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.3.4 Patch and Removal Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.4 Cost-Benefit Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.4.1 General Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.4.2 Cost-Benefit Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
1
3.4.3 Methods to Determine Gain and Cost . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.5 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4 Case Study and Analysis 33
4.1 Code-Red . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.2 SQL Slammer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.3 Conficker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
4.4 Key Observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5 Evaluation 52
6 Future Work 54
7 Conclusion 56
A 57
Bibliography 63
2
Chapter 1
Introduction
The malware problem has posed a great threat to the security of network
systems nowadays. With the increasing complexity of malware, it has become
much difficult to detect its existence. In order to prevent the infection and
clear the malware, several deployments may exist. Each of them has the
operational cost and effectiveness. A security action with great effectiveness
often has a high cost. Therefore, when the infection begins to spread in the
computer network, how to balance the cost and benefit and choose the best
strategy is of vital importance.
1.1 Aims and Objectives
This project has two main aims. Firstly, we combine epidemiology modeling
with game theory to construct computer models which are specialized to
the defense against malware proliferation problem in the computer network.
Secondly, we utilize models to analyze real malware and provide some useful
advice on what security strategies should be deployed in different malware
scenarios.
3
1.1.1 Model Objectives
Here, we list objectives of model development.
Investigate malware problem and epidemiology modeling.
Study the complex topology and work out the way of combining it with
epidemiology models.
Construct theoretical models to simulate malware proliferation behavior
when complex topology is taken into account and different security strategies
are deployed.
Study game theory and have a clear understanding of the “FLIPIT” game.
Carry out the cost-benefit analysis and construct cost-benefit models.
Combine all models to work out the way to determine the best security
strategy.
Implement all theoretical models.
1.1.2 Analysis Objectives
Here, we list objectives of data analysis.
Study several striking examples of malware in detail.
In each malware scenario, we address the following questions:
• For each security strategy, how do the overall benefit and the infected
population change when defenders notice the infection and deploy this
strategy at different time of the spread period?
• After defenders discover the infection, how do they choose the best
strategy?
4
Give some helpful advice on what security strategies should be deployed
in different malware scenarios.
1.2 Structure
This report consists of five chapters. To begin with, we review the back-
ground research of the project. This includes the study of malware problem,
epidemiology modeling and game theory. As for game theory, we give a de-
tailed description of “FLIPIT” game scenario which lays a solid foundation
for the construction of game theoretical models. In the next chapter, we focus
on explaining game theoretical models and cost-benefit models; then, we dis-
cuss how to determine the best strategy by utilizing the models and present
a brief description of how to implement all models. The fourth chapter is
the case study and analysis of results. We study three worms and fit real
data into computer models. Based on the results, we summarize some key
observations which may give useful guidance to the decision making problem.
The evaluation chapter discusses whether this project has met the objectives
and whether it has been successful. Finally, the future work chapter explains
the further work that could be carried out to develop models and analyze
more malware cases.
5
Chapter 2
Background and Context
This chapter reviews and summarizes the background research of the project.
The project encompasses two main research areas including the epidemiology
modeling and game theory. In order to investigate the relationship between
them, we should at first study each area separately. Therefore, in the fol-
lowing sections, we focus on the fundamental concepts and methods which
are necessary to the project. To begin with, we study some basic knowledge
of malware in order to get a rough idea of malware proliferation mechanis-
m. Secondly, we give a general description of two standard epidemiological
models. In the third section, we investigate the complex topology. Finally,
we aim at having a better understanding of game theoretical approaches and
then give a detailed analysis of the “FLIPIT” game scenario.
2.1 Malware Background
Malware is the abbreviation of malicious software. It consists of computer
viruses, worms, Trojan horses and other malicious programs. In this section,
we focus on studying and understanding mechanisms of malware such that
we are able to make countermeasures against it.
At first, we study the transmission and infection mechanism of the mal-
6
ware which is summarized in table 2.1 (taken from [15]). If malware wants to
infect a computer successfully, it should gain access to the target by making
use of some methods to travel to it. There are three ways in terms of the
human cooperation. The malware can be inserted manually by an individual
deliberately or triggered by someone unintentionally. In addition, it can also
exploit the vulnerability which exists in the operating system and infect the
computer without human intervention. Besides, the access to the target must
be through some medium, either a storage medium or the network. From
table 2.1, we can see that only network-based transmission does not need
the human cooperation. In typical examples of this characteristic, the infec-
tion way of using security vulnerability does not require human intervention;
using emails or sharing files still needs a human to trigger the infection by
opening the email or the shared file.
Table 2.1: The transmission and infection mechanism of the malware
(from [15]).
Characteristic Typical Examples
Human Cooperation
Deliberate manual insertion
Inadvertent insertion
Autonomous insertion,
no human cooperation
Through Removal Floppy
Storage Medium CD
Through Network
Security vulnerability in
running service
E-mail
File shares
Then, we study the self-defense mechanism of malware. Table 2.2 (taken
from [15]) shows four main ways that malware usually takes to protect itself.
Protective strategies vary with different levels of effort that malware should
take. The most common way is to keep a low profile. For the stealth strategy,
the malware can hide itself in the system by taking the form of obscurity,
or, it can mislead the administrator and users by pretending to act as the
authorised program or running within the authorised program. Moreover, it
7
is also able to subvert a system to confuse the detective software. In order
to increase the detecting difficulty, another strategy has also been developed
by changing the appearance of the malware, such as encryption and poly-
morphism. However, with the increasing number of well-designed antivirus
software, it becomes much easier to identify different forms of secret malware.
Thus, malware is designed to disable the antivirus software or developed into
several variants to increase the chance of reinfection.
Table 2.2: The self-defense mechanism of the malware (from [15]).
Protective Strategy Example Mechanisms
Stealth
Subverting system calls
Mimicking authorised
programs
Piggybacking on
authorised programs
Obscurity
Evading Detection Software
Encryption
Polymorphism
Rapid development
Disabling Detection Removing AV software
Redundancy Re-infection
Finally, we study factors contributing to the malware proliferation. The
spread of malware relies on two main factors: the population and the envi-
ronment. They are shown in table 2.3 (taken from [15]).
As for the population, size is the first influencing factor. The number of
individuals within the population determines the range of malware prolifer-
ation. Larger population is more likely to help malware spread and increase
the infected population base. In addition, the intimacy between individuals
affects the success ratio of infection. If two individuals contact each other
frequently, the infection of one individual may probably transfer the malware
to another individual by sending emails or sharing files. Finally, the common
points shared by the whole population or parts of the population are also the
main target exploited by malware. Suppose that all individuals use the same
8
Table 2.3: Factors that facilitate malware proliferation (from [15]).
Size
Population Intimacy
Shared characteristics
Number of features
Target Complexity Level of feature integration
Use of mobile code
office software. The malware can exploit vulnerabilities of this office software
and carry out attacks on the whole population. If the software is used by a
small portion of the total population, the infection range will reduce greatly.
The environment also contributes much to malware proliferation. Be-
cause malware exploits vulnerabilities of software, the security of software is
the most important factor in preventing malware infection. The complexity
of software determines that in what degree vulnerabilities may exist. The
more codes the software has, the greater probability that more vulnerabil-
ities exist and may be exploited by malware. Nowadays, more and more
software is designed by the principle of compatibility to facilitate user ex-
perience. However, such design is also beneficial to malware propagation.
Shared codes in different software provide malware with convenient channels
to make use of vulnerabilities exposed in these codes and carry out attacks
on many software simultaneously. The programming language also exerts
great influence on software security. Some languages have built-in security
mechanisms to prevent potential security failures. However, some languages,
such as the scripting language, do not have such built-in mechanisms so that
software with these languages may be exploited as vectors of malware.
9
2.2 General Description of Epidemiology Mod-
els
The epidemiology modeling of malware proliferation has been studied for
decades. The spread of biological diseases and computer malware (viruses,
worms etc.) is analogical, so the analysis of computer malware can benefit
from investigating the behavior of biological diseases. Therefore, in macro-
scopic view, the epidemiology method provides an effective way to research
on the prevalence of the malware.
In epidemiology area, there are two kinds of models for analyzing malware
proliferation: stochastic models and deterministic models. Stochastic models
are used to analyze small-scale network; while deterministic models are used
to analyze large-scale network. In order to study the effect of mass action, we
consider malware spread in the network with a large number of computers,
so we will utilize deterministic models.
In general, individuals in the epidemic population have several states,
including susceptible, infected, recovered, dead, etc. Some models have been
studied on state transitions and named by the order of states. There are
two commonly used models, Susceptible Infected Susceptible (SIS) model and
Susceptible Infected Recovered (SIR) model. The simplest SIR model was
created by Kermack and McKendrick [5] in 1927. Then, the SIS model was
derived from the SIR model. Both of them are standard models and have
been widely applied in many investigations of malware proliferation.
Both models assume that all individuals within a closed population (no
births and deaths) are susceptible to the malware in the initial phase and an
individual may go through each state sequentially. In the SIS model, the state
transitions of an individual form a circulation. The individual may recover
from the infection, but there is still a chance that it is reinfected. So an
individual becomes susceptible to the malware again after it recovers. In the
SIR model, the final state is a recovered state. It means that an individual
may recover from the infection and become immune to the malware when
the infection is cleared, and the vulnerability is patched.
Standard epidemiology models usually have two shortcomings. The first
10
one is that the network should be homogeneous. It means that in a single
network architecture, an individual can infect any other individuals. The
second one is that the network should be symmetric. It means that there is
no preferential direction of the malware transmission.
2.3 Topology Consideration
The topological analysis plays an important role in the epidemiological mod-
eling. The prevalence of infection in the complex network is based on the
connectivity of the network. Therefore, different topologies may significantly
change the spreading way of malware. Placing malware in different kinds of
social networks is an effective way to analyze malware proliferation compre-
hensively such that countermeasures are worked out in different situations.
Among many communication networks, the most valuable example is the
Internet. Nowadays, the Internet has become the most essential tool in many
fields including business, governance, communication and entertainment etc.
The stability and availability of the Internet for us is of vital significance.
However, because of the big importance, the Internet has also become the
main attacking target of malware for dozens of years. Thus, the malware
threat on the Internet becomes a very urgent and thorny problem.
The structure of the Internet can be well-described as the scale-free net-
work. Nodes in the scale-free network are not evenly connected. There are
several “very connected” nodes, called hubs with the highest degree. The
most notable characteristic is that the degree distribution conforms to a
power law distribution, which is shown in figure 2.1 (taken from [1]).
2.4 Game Theory in Malware Analysis
Game theory has been proposed to address the network security issues for
decades. In this section, we apply game theory to investigate the malware
proliferation. Firstly, we study why game theory can be used in malware
11
Figure 2.1: The power law distribution of the scale-free network (from [1]).
analysis and present some key concepts related to the project. Then, we
analyze the “FLIPIT” game scenario.
2.4.1 Why Use Game Theory in Malware Analysis
Traditionally, the network security deployments are divided into two parts:
“protective devices”, like firewalls, or “detective and reactive devices”, like
intrusion detection systems (IDSs) [12]. Firewalls use a predesigned set of
rules to deny unauthorized network communications. IDSs use two databas-
es, attack signatures or baseline behaviors of legitimate users, to identify and
alert attacks. Some IDSs may also make an active response to counter illegal
activities that are detected.
These two security deployments have been used in combination to thwart
malware attacks. However, both of them aim at analyzing the malware
problem in micro level. They focus on collecting, dissecting and recording
the structure and behavior of malware. So they are efficient for preventing
well-known malware, because their techniques are based on experimental
work. But the main weakness is that they do not take into account the
decision making problem of attackers.
As traditional approaches are lack of exploring interactions between the
attacker and the defender, researchers have been applying the game theory
12
to the network security problem. The relationship between the attacker and
defender is just like the relationship between two players in the game scenario.
If the malware destroys the network or controls computers in the network,
the attacker can benefit from such destruction. Meanwhile, people who own
the computers suffer from the cost of losing control. So the attacker and
the defender have contradictory objectives and share direct relationship of
interests. Moreover, during the process, the attacker tries to find the most
effective way to carry out attacks in the network; and the defender also
plans to choose the best defensive approach to protect the network. As game
theory is used for studying decision making problem in multiplayer scenarios,
it can examine and evaluate the scenarios with all possible decisions made
by players and compute the best strategy among the payoffs.
In brief, the game theoretical analysis is the best tool to study interactions
between the attacker and the defender. It sophisticates the decision making
process to the greatest extent and offers the defender an effective way to
determine the best reaction against the attacker.
2.4.2 Brief Introduction to Game Theory
The background knowledge of game theory presented in [12, 16] provides us
with a better understanding of game theoretical solutions and guidance to
strategy making problem.
In general, games are divided into cooperative and non-cooperative games.
In cooperative games, all players try to maximize the overall payoff. In non-
cooperative games, all players just care about their own benefit and cost. In
the field of network security, the research falls under the category of non-
cooperative games, because the attacker aims at attacking the network and
the defender aims at protecting the network; there is no cooperation between
them.
Under the category of non-cooperation, games are divided into static
and dynamic games. In static games, all players make their decisions si-
multaneously such that they do not know others’ strategies. Static game is
a one-shot game. Each player has a pre-computed move list. In dynamic
games, all players go through more than one stage. They can consider their
13
strategies in each stage and then take actions sequentially. Static games can
also be modified in a dynamic version if players repeat their decisions for
many times.
There is another way to classify non-cooperative games based on the
information received by players. Four subtypes exist: perfect and complete
information, perfect and incomplete information, imperfect and complete
information, imperfect and incomplete information. Complete information
means that all players know the overall payoff. Incomplete information means
that at least one player does not know the overall payoff. Perfect information
means that the player with the move now knows all moves of what other
players have taken. Imperfect information means that at least one player
with the move does not know the full history of the game played so far. The
static game is only of imperfect information.
One of the most commonly used types is the zero-sum game. It is the
sub-type of the constant-sum game. In the zero-sum game, the gain (cost)
of one player is completely balanced by the cost (gain) of other players; the
total gain is equal to the total cost. In contrast, the sum of all payoffs in
the non-zero-sum game is not equal to zero. The optimal solution, in the
zero-sum game, is usually worked out by the Nash Equilibrium. A Nash
Equilibrium computes a steady state which involves at least two players.
Under this state, no player wants to change his strategy unilaterally, because
no more gain is received when other players keep their strategies unchanged.
Strategies are divided into pure and mix strategies. Pure strategy is the
single strategy made by the player. Mix strategy means that the player has
a set of strategies with a probability distribution. In general, players make
the mixed strategy and try to maximize their own benefit by finding out the
most suitable probability distribution for their strategy profile. Figure 2.2
(taken from [23]) shows some detailed strategies made by the attacker and
the defender. Here, ? denotes the spread rate of malware and ? denotes the
recovery rate of the computer; R0 denotes the spread efficiency of malware in
the network, which is shown in formula 2.1. When deciding what strategies
to use, this figure is a good reference.
R0 =
?
?
(2.1)
14
Figure 2.2: Battle between the cyber attack and the cyber defense (from [23]).
2.4.3 “FLIPIT” Game
Combined with the cost-benefit analysis, Rivest and his colleagues investi-
gated interactions between the attacker and the defender in the “FLIPIT”
game scenario [17] and proposed some defensive strategies. Sometimes, the
attacker may periodically control computers in the network or steal the im-
portant information without being noticed by the defender immediately. In
such a situation, the “FLIPIT” game becomes the best model to study secret
takeovers by the attacker and to find out effective strategies deployed by the
defender.
In the “FLIPIT” game, there are two players, the attacker and the de-
fender, and a shared resource. Two players compete to take control of the
critical resource. The attacker tries to put the resource into a bad state;
while the defender puts the resource into a good state. Two players take
over the control by making moves sequentially. Sometimes, one player makes
a move but does not take over the control, so the moves are not certainly
15
effective. The objective of each player is to control the resource for a large
fraction of time and minimize the total cost. Here, we assume that players
do not know the current situation of the game when other players make a
move; they learn the situation only when they make a move. Making a move
pays cost and taking over the control gains benefit. Each player loses some
points per move and gains some points per second when he is in control.
At first, we show a graphical example in figure 2.3 (taken from [17]). The
blue area represents the period of defender’s control on the critical resource;
the red area represents the period of attacker’s control on the resource. The
blue circle represents the defender’s move; the red circle represents the at-
tacker’s move. The arrow represents a takeover by the defender or attacker.
We assume that the defender is in control at the beginning of the game.
Figure 2.3: The FLIPIT Game (from [17]).
Then, we give the mathematical description taken from [17]. Here, we
assume that the defender is player 0 and the attacker is player 1. For player i ,
he pays ki points per move and gains one point per second in control. Formula
2.2 shows the gain rate ?i(t) for player i ; Gi denotes the number of seconds
that player i is in control.
?i(t) =
Gi(t)
t
(2.2)
Formula 2.3 shows that the whole period time t is the time controlled by
the defender plus the time controlled by the attacker.
G0(t) +G1(t) = t (2.3)
Thus, for each player, the gain rate ?i(t) also means the fraction of time
16
in control, shown in formula 2.4.
?0(t) + ?1(t) = 1 (2.4)
Formula 2.5 shows the average rate of play ?i(t) for player i ; Ni denotes
the number of moves for player i .
?i(t) =
Ni(t)
t
(2.5)
In formula 2.6, the benefit Bi(t) is denoted as the gain minus the cost.
Bi(t) = Gi(t)? ki ?Ni(t) (2.6)
The benefit rate ?i(t) is calculated based on Formula 2.2, 2.5, 2.6 and
shown in formula 2.7. Each player aims at maximizing their benefit rate.
?i(t) =
Bi(t)
t
?
?i(t) =
Gi(t)? ki ?Ni(t)
t
?
?i(t) = ?i(t)? ki ? ?i(t)
(2.7)
Strategies are divided into non-adaptive and adaptive strategies. In non-
adaptive strategies, players can not get any feedback during the whole pro-
cess. There are periodic play, exponential play and renewal play. In adaptive
strategies, players are able to get certain forms of feedback. We summarize
these strategies in the game scenario as follows:
• If both the attacker and the defender play periodically or exponen-
tially, the optimal strategy for the defender is calculated by the Nash
equilibrium.
17
• If the attacker plays renewal strategy, the optimal strategy for the
defender is either periodic play or not playing (when the attacker plays
very fast).
• If the attacker plays adaptively, the optimal strategy for the defender
is to play exponentially. In this scenario, the defender cannot play
periodically, because the attacker can learn the defender’s strategy after
the defender moves.
Above all, we can conclude two valuable lessons. Firstly, if the defender
wants to win the game, the best strategy for him is to play faster than the
attacker. Then, the attacker is unable to react immediately and forced to
drop out. However, in order to play fast, the defender should make his cost of
making a move much lower than that of the attacker. When the attacker takes
over the control, the defender can retake control without taking much time
and paying much cost. Secondly, the “FLIPIT” game provides guidance on
when to implement the cost-driven defense. The analysis guides the defender
in how often he should deploy security countermeasures; while it also helps
the attacker with his strategies of how often to play in order to maximize the
damage.
18
Chapter 3
Models and Methods
This chapter is divided into five sections. At first, we study the mathematical
formulation of two standard epidemiology models (the SIR model and the
SIS model). Secondly, we take the scale-free network parameter into consid-
eration and show the way of combining it with epidemiology models. In the
third section, we analyze the strategy making problem and construct game
theoretical models based the content of previous two sections. In the fourth
section, in order to determine the best security rate in game theoretical mod-
els, we work out cost-benefit models and present methods to determine the
gain and cost when real data are provided. Finally, we discuss how to utilize
all models to decide the best strategy and show the implementation of our
models.
3.1 Mathematical Specification of Standard
Epidemiology Models
In this section, we present the mathematical specification of two standard
epidemiology models. Game theoretical models are extended from these two
models. In general, epidemiology models are formulated over a fixed-size net-
work. Nodes represent individuals. Links or edges between nodes represent
contacts between individuals. The infection spreads along with the direct
19
link between two nodes. Without the topology consideration, the epidemi-
ology models assume that the infection of the virus evenly spreads over the
simple network.
3.1.1 The SIR Model
The simplest SIR model is the “Kermack-McKendrick” model [22, 5] which
computes the number of infected individuals in a fixed-size population over
time. In the SIR model, the total population is divided into three parts:
the susceptible individuals (denoted by S), the infected individuals (denoted
by I) and the recovered individuals (denoted by R). Formula 3.1, 3.2 and
3.3 (from [22, 5]) show the increasing number of susceptible nodes, infected
nodes and recovered nodes over time respectively. Here, ? denotes the average
number of transmissions possible from an infected node in each unit time,
also regarded as the infection rate; ? denotes the average number of infected
nodes who recover from an infection and become immune to the malware in
each unit time, also regarded as the recovery rate.
dS
dt
= ??IS (3.1)
dI
dt
= ?IS ? ?I (3.2)
dR
dt
= ?I (3.3)
3.1.2 The SIS Model
The simplest SIS model is taken from [23]. In the SIS model, the total pop-
ulation is divided into two parts: the susceptible individuals (denoted by S)
and the infected individuals (denoted by I). The model shows: at the begin-
ning, the spread of the infection grows slowly, because the infected computers
are few; then, with the increasing number of infected computers, the infec-
tion spreads fast; in the final phase, the infection grows slowly again and the
number of infected computers reaches the maximum, because the chance of
20
infecting a susceptible computer reduces. Formula 3.4 and 3.5 (from [23])
show the increasing number of susceptible nodes and infected nodes over
time respectively. Here, ? denotes the average number of transmissions pos-
sible from an infected node in each unit time, also regarded as the infection
rate; ? denotes the average number of infected nodes who recover from an
infection and become susceptible again in each unit time, also regarded as
the recovery rate.
dS
dt
= ??IS + ?I (3.4)
dI
dt
= ?IS ? ?I (3.5)
3.2 Topology Consideration
We use the scale-free network as the topology. We make the assumption
that the scale-free network is a homogeneous network in which all computers
have similar configuration or run the same operating system. Although the
scale-free network is considered as heterogeneity in most cases, malware pro-
liferation behavior does not change in the homogeneous network. Then, we
can use the average spread rate of malware in order to simply the situation.
At first, we construct a random scale-free network by using the “Barabasi-
Albert” (BA) algorithm. The BA algorithm follows the “preferential attach-
ment” procedure [14] which means that the new node is more likely to connect
the highly connected nodes. By starting with a small number of disconnect-
ed nodes, it iterates the procedure for many times to get the network with
the connectivity distribution of P (k) ? k?? in which 2 < ? < 3. Secondly,
after the construction of the scale-free network, we use the method of mean
field approximation [25] to combine the parameter of scale-free network with
epidemiology models. In formula 3.6, the parameter < k > is “the average
number of connections with the probability P (k) of each degree k”.
< k >=
∑
k
k ? P (k) (3.6)
21
By using the mean field method, we define < k > I as the fraction of
infected neighbours of a susceptible node. We take the standard SIR as the
example. In formula 3.7, 3.8 and 3.9, we combine the scale-free network
parameter with the SIR model.
dS
dt
= ?? < k > IS (3.7)
dI
dt
= ? < k > IS ? ?I (3.8)
dR
dt
= ?I (3.9)
3.3 Game Theoretical Models
In this section, we consider the strategy making problem based on the anal-
ysis of malware. Then, we can determine what security strategies should be
deployed and work out game theoretical models.
3.3.1 Strategy Making Problem
Before we make a decision about security strategies, we should decide the
malware which we can utilize in game theoretical models.
With the study of malware classification, we have found that worms are
self-replicating and able to spread without human intervention in the net-
work [11]. Considering the limitation of models, we should analyze random-
scanning and self-activated worms. As for random-scan, it means that worm
spreads without topology constraint. Worms via emails have specific routes
according to the email list of each infected computer; then, we cannot de-
cide which susceptible computer becomes infected. Therefore, the random-
scanning worm is the best choice. In terms of self-activation, it is the fastest
activating way in which the worm usually exploits the vulnerability that ex-
ists in the computer system. Otherwise, we should determine the time that
a human triggers the worm, which makes the situation more complicated.
22
Based on the analysis of worms, there are usually three security deploy-
ments: removal, patch, both patch and removal. When the computer is
infected by a worm, we should download the removal tool to clear the worm
and patch the vulnerability exploited by the worm in order to prevent re-
infection; if we only remove the worm, the infected computer will become
susceptible again. As for susceptible computers, we can patch the vulnera-
bility to prevent infection. For each security deployment, we set up a game
theoretical model with the scale-free network parameter to analyze the effect
of this strategy.
3.3.2 Patch Strategy
When we use patch strategy, susceptible computers can become immune to
the worm; but infected computers cannot recover from the infection. In
this case, the worm and the defender seem to take part in a race. If the
worm spreads very fast, it will infect most computers in a short time before
defenders notice it; if people in the network can patch their computers much
faster than the worm proliferation, the wide-range infection can be avoided.
We modify the standard SIR model and combine the scale-free network
parameter to construct the model, shown in formula 3.10, 3.11 and 3.12.
Here, we assume that the infected computer cannot be patched over the
period of patch dissemination. We denote that R means recovered individuals
from the susceptible state and the security rate ? is the patch rate.
dS
dt
= ?? < k > IS ? ?IS (3.10)
dI
dt
= ? < k > IS (3.11)
dR
dt
= ?IS (3.12)
For recovered computers, the recovered process from the susceptible state
is similar to the infected process [6]. At the beginning of the worm propa-
gation, most people don’t know the existence of the worm. Gradually, with
23
the increasing infected computers, people notice the worm and begin to take
some actions to defend against it. Finally, the patch rate decreases as the
number of susceptible computers reduces to zero.
3.3.3 Removal Strategy
When we download the removal tool and clear the worm, infected computers
can recover from the infection but become susceptible again. This conforms
to the standard SIS model. We combine the scale-free network parameter
with the SIS model to construct the model, shown in formula 3.13 and 3.14.
Here, we denote that the security rate ? is the removal rate.
dS
dt
= ?? < k > IS + ?I (3.13)
dI
dt
= ? < k > IS ? ?I (3.14)
3.3.4 Patch and Removal Strategy
The third strategy is to use both patch and removal. For susceptible comput-
ers, we patch the vulnerability to prevent the infection; for infected comput-
ers, we remove the worm at first and then patch the vulnerability to avoid
reinfection. In this case, we have four states, susceptible (denoted by S),
infected (denoted by I), recovered from the infection (denoted by R) and
immunized from the susceptibility (denoted by Q). We have three state
transitions: susceptible to infected, susceptible to immunized and infected
to recovered and immunized. We can extend the standard SIR model and
combine the scale-free network parameter to construct the model, shown in
formula 3.15, 3.16, 3.17 and 3.18. Here, we assume that the patch rate for
susceptible computers and the security rate (both patch and removal) for
infected computers are the same.
dS
dt
= ?? < k > IS ? ?(I +R)S (3.15)
24
dI
dt
= ? < k > IS ? ?I (3.16)
dR
dt
= ?I (3.17)
dQ
dt
= ?(I +R)S (3.18)
3.4 Cost-Benefit Analysis
In game theoretical models, the worm spread rate is taken from the statistics
of the real worm. Then, in order to determine the best security rate, we
should analyze the payoff of worm behavior and security deployments. Thus,
in this section, we work out cost-benefit models and present methods to
determine the gain and cost of both worm and security actions when real
data are fitted into our models.
3.4.1 General Description
Cost-benefit models are similar to the “FLIPIT” game models mentioned
in the background chapter. As for the malware, it has the average spread
rate and pays the cost for its propagating and infecting actions. As for the
defender, each computer has defensive and responsive actions; then, there is
a security rate in the network which means the average number of computers
taking security actions to defend against the infection in unit time. In our
models, we assume that players can not get any feedback during the worm
spread period, because we use the average rate of play which stays constant.
3.4.2 Cost-Benefit Model
Now, we give the formulation of cost-benefit models. We suppose that there
is a network consisting of a large number of computers, and the malware is
player 0, the defender is player 1. All computers are the critical resource.
25
The malware tries to infect computers as many as possible; the defender tries
to protect each computer against infection or restore it after its infection.
At any time of the worm spread period, a computer in the network is
controlled by either the worm or the defender. Therefore, for each player i, we
define the gain Gi(t) as the amount of time for the fraction of the population
in control from the start of the game up to time t. We show it in formula
3.19. Here, Pi(t) denotes the fraction of population in control over time t.
Gi(t) =
∫ t
0
Pi(t) ? t ? dt (3.19)
Thus, the total time of the spread period is the sum of each player’s
amount of time for their controlled population which is shown in formula
3.20.
G0(t) +G1(t) = t (3.20)
Then, for each player i, we define the average gain rate ?i(t) in formula
3.21.
?i(t) =
Gi(t)
t
(3.21)
A computer may have several state transitions during the whole spread
period: a susceptible computer becomes infected at any time; a computer
keeps disinfected state if it changes from susceptible state to immunized
state by patch; an infected computer recovers from infection by patch and
removal strategy; an infected computer becomes susceptible again by only
removing the worm. Thus, the average gain rate can be approximated as
the average fraction of population in control for each player. To sum up, in
formula 3.22, we define the average gain rate ?i(t) for player i as the average
fraction of population in control up to time t.
?0(t) + ?1(t) = 1 (3.22)
26
For each player, we define the cost Ci(t) as total moves that player i has
taken ni(t), times the cost of each move ki, which is shown in formula 3.23.
Ci(t) = ni(t) ? ki (3.23)
In formula 3.24, the total moves for player i is denoted as the average
rate of play ?i(t) times total time t.
ni(t) = ?i(t) ? t (3.24)
Thus, the average cost rate µi(t) is denoted as the average rate of play ?i(t) times
the cost of each move ki, shown in formula 3.25.
µi(t) =
Ci(t)
t
= ?i(t) ? ki (3.25)
Players receive benefit which is equal to the total time for their con-
trolled population, minus the cost of their total moves. We denote the ben-
efit Bi(t) for each player i in formula 3.26.
Bi(t) = Gi(t)? Ci(t) (3.26)
Thus, the average benefit rate bi(t) is shown in formula 3.27.
bi(t) =
Bi(t)
t
?
bi(t) =
Gi(t)
t
? Ci(t)
t
?
bi(t) = ?i(t)? µi(t) ?
bi(t) = ?i(t)? ?i(t) ? ki
(3.27)
Finally, in formula 3.28, we define the overall benefit rate of the network,
which equals to the defender’s benefit rate minus the attacker’s benefit rate.
27
b1(t)? b0t = (?1(t)? ?1(t) ? k1)? (?0(t)? ?0(t) ? k0) (3.28)
3.4.3 Methods to Determine Gain and Cost
After the construction of cost-benefit models, we should find out the way to
determine the gain and cost when real data are provided.
As for the gain, we should decide the fraction of population in control
for each player. We focus on the analysis of the average infected population,
then the average disinfected population is denoted by one minus the average
infected population.
In patch strategy, the malware spreads in the susceptible population;
and the patch can not make an infected computer recover. Thus, the average
fraction of infected population controlled by malware, p, is determined by the
initial infection and the spread efficiency in the susceptible population, which
is shown in formula 3.29. Here, I0 denotes the initial infection and S0 denotes
the initial susceptible population.
p = I0 +
S0 < k > ?
2?
(3.29)
In removal strategy, the malware spreads in the susceptible population.
The removal strategy clears the malware but can not make an infected com-
puter become immune to the infection. Thus, the average fraction of infected
population controlled by malware is determined by the average fraction of
residual initial infection and the spread efficiency in the susceptible popula-
tion, which is shown in formula 3.30.
p =
I0(1? ?)
2
+
(S0 + I0?) < k > ?
2?
(3.30)
In the patch and removal strategy, all infected computers can recover
from the infection and become immune to the malware at the end of the
28
spread period. Therefore, the average fraction of the infected population is
determined by the change of the initial infection and the spread efficiency
in the susceptible population. In this case, the spread efficiency has some
direct and proportional relation with the average fraction of residual infected
neighbours of a susceptible computer, because the infected computer may
recover from the infection and can not infect other computers. Thus, the
average fraction of the infected population is shown in formula 3.31.
p =
I0
2
+
S0(I0 ? I0?) < k > ?
2?
(3.31)
As for the cost, we utilize the operational quantity and complexity to
determine it. For each player, they will take several actions to reach their
goal; for each action, there is a complexity level. We set up three complexity
levels, low, medium and high and give a score to each of them, 1, 2 and 3.
We show an example in table 3.1. By using this standard, we can decide the
cost of each player when they take an action.
Table 3.1: An example of calculating the cost.
Actions
Complexity
Total
Low:1 Medium:2 High:3
Action 1 1
m
Action 2 3
...
Action n 2
3.5 Summary
In this section, we discuss how to use game theoretical models and cost-
benefit models to find out the best security strategy and present the imple-
mentation of our models.
In general, we should take two things into consideration when we want
to decide the best strategy: the initial fraction of infection and factors to
29
determine the best strategy. As for the initial infection, defenders in the
network can take actions in different stages of the spread period, because they
may notice the infection at any time. Therefore, by analyzing each strategy
in different initial fractions of infected computers, we can know what strategy
should be deployed when we discover the worm and begin to take actions at
any time. In order to determine the best strategy, we should analyze four
factors including the overall benefit rate, the defender’s benefit rate, the final
infected population and the infection change; then, we combine these factors
to analyze each strategy comprehensively and give the conclusion. We use
Matlab to implement all theoretical models.
At first, we consider a medium-sized and homogeneous network which
consists of computers running same operation system such that the worm
has the equal chance to infect each computer. We assume that all computers
are always online. Thus, the worm can infect the computer at any time.
We download the source code of generating a scale-free network from the
Internet. We use a random seed as the original network which consists of
5 nodes and produce a network of 1000 nodes in the scenario. Then, we
download another source code of calculating the frequency of each degree
and modify a small part of it to calculate the network parameter.
Secondly, we use Matlab to implement cost-benefit models. For each
strategy, we have different formulas to find out the maximum of the overal
benefit rate when the initial infection, the network parameter, the cost of
both malware infection and security strategy, and the average spread rate
of the worm are provided. By working out the best overall benefit rate, we
can get the best security rate. For each strategy, we present the way to
calculate the maximum of the overall benefit rate in formula 3.32, 3.33 and
3.34 respectively.
For patch strategy,
(1? I0 ? S0 < k > ?
2?
? k1?)?
(I0 +
S0 < k > ?
2?
? k0 < k > ?).
(3.32)
30
For removal strategy,
(1? I0(1? ?)
2
? (S0 + I0?) < k > ?
2?
? k1?)?
(
I0(1? ?)
2
+
(S0 + I0?) < k > ?
2?
? k0 < k > ?).
(3.33)
For patch and removal strategy,
(1? I0
2
? S0(I0 ? I0?) < k > ?
2?
? k1?)?
(
I0
2
+
S0(I0 ? I0?) < k > ?
2?
? k0 < k > ?).
(3.34)
Besides the best security rate and the overall benefit rate, we can also
calculate the defender’s benefit rate of each strategy.
Finally, we use Matlab to implement three game theoretical models.
Then, for each strategy, we fit the real data into the corresponding game
theoretical model and write a function to produce the final infected popu-
lation (the population in the steady state of the network) when the initial
infection, the network parameter, the average spread rate of the worm, the
security rate, and the time of malware spread period are provided. Here, we
set the time of malware spread period as the maximum value, which guar-
antees that the network goes into the stable state for each initial infection.
We should also compute the change of infection, which is the final infected
population minus the initial infected population.
The initial fraction of the infected population starts from 0.02 to 0.98 and
increases 0.02 by each step. For each initial infection, we repeat the above
procedure. Because we should analyze four factors, we produce a trend line
of each factor by connecting the factor point of different initial infections. For
each strategy, we produce four trend lines. For different strategies, we put
the lines of the same factor in one graph to compare the difference between
them.
31
In practical situations, we should decide the parameters before we conduct
the analysis. At first, the network parameter can be calculated by collecting
data from the network. Then, from the record of anti-virus software, we can
compute the average worm spread rate and the initial infection, and estimate
the cost of security deployments. Finally, we can produce the cost of worm
infection and the worm spread period by approximation after doing some
research on the worm infection mechanism.
32
Chapter 4
Case Study and Analysis
In this chapter, we fit real data into computer models and analyze the results.
We study three worms, Code-Red, SQL Slammer and Conficker. They are
all random-scanning worms with no topology constraints, and they are self-
activated by exploiting the vulnerability which exists in the operating system
or software. What’s more, each of them has its striking features. Therefore,
we can learn different things from each worm analysis.
4.1 Code-Red
Code-Red worm was discovered in July 2001. It exploits the “buffer-overflow”
vulnerability in “Microsoft IIS Web Server”. It produces a list of random IP
addresses and launches 99 threads to search each computer in the list in order
to infect as many vulnerable computers as possible. It has two versions:
Code-Red v1 and Code-Red v2. Code-Red v1 spreads slowly because it
generates an identical list by using a static seed. Code-Red v2 is the variant
of Code-Red v1. It can infect new computers by using a random seed for its
pseudo-random generator. Therefore, the new version has a greater impact
on global resource because of its high spread speed. The greatest damage is
that it can launch a massive DoS attack. This worm is memory resident. We
can reboot computers to clear the worm. In order to prevent reinfection, we
33
should also patch computers.
In this scenario, we suppose that the homogeneous scale-free network con-
sists of 1000 computers, and each computer is running Microsoft Operating
System which includes the Microsoft IIS Web Server. We take the average
spread rate of Code-Red from [24] (0.00045). We set the maximum time of
the worm spread period as 10000 seconds, 50000 seconds and 100000 seconds
for patch strategy, removal strategy, patch and removal strategy respective-
ly. We summarize the cost of worm proliferation and defender’s security
deployments in table 4.3 and 4.4 respectively.
Table 4.1: The cost of Code-Red.
Actions
Complexity
Total
Low:1 Medium:2 High:3
Exploit the buffer
1
3
overflow vulnerability
Generate random IP
1
addresses
Launch 99 threads
1
with generated IP
addresses
Table 4.2: The cost of security deployments.
Actions
Complexity
Total
Low:1 Medium:2 High:3
Patch
Detection 1
2
Patch 1
Removal
Detection 1
2
Reboot 1
Both
Detection 1
5Patch 1
Reboot 1
By deploying the methods and models mentioned in the third chapter,
we compute and analyze four factors of each strategy. We show the overall
34
benefit rate and defender’s benefit rate in figure 4.6 and 4.7 respectively,
the spread rate and security rates in figure 4.8, the infected population and
change of infection in figure 4.9 and 4.10 respectively.
Figure 4.1: The overall benefit rate.
In patch strategy, the overall benefit rate is higher than zero when the
fraction of initial infection is less than 0.48 and then becomes less than zero
after that. The defender’s benefit rate is higher than zero for each initial
infection. Both benefit rates have the decreasing trend with the increasing
initial infection, and they are lowest compared with benefit rates of the other
two strategies. The patch rate reduces with the rising initial infection and it
is higher than the worm propagation rate for each initial infection, because
the cost of this strategy is lower than the cost of worm spread behavior.
For each initial infection, the change of the infected population keeps stable
around zero which means that the infected population does not increase much
although patch cannot restore infected computers.
In removal strategy, the overall benefit rate and defender’s benefit rate
decrease steadily when the initial infection rises and keep much higher than
zero. The removal rate has the similar trend with the patch rate. For each
initial infection, the final infected population is zero at the end of the spread
period.
35
Figure 4.2: The defender’s benefit rate.
In the patch and removal strategy, both benefit rates have similar trend
with those of the removal strategy. The security rate is higher than the
spread rate for each initial infection. It increases when the initial infection
is less than 0.5 and decreases after that. For each initial infection, the final
infected population keeps zero at the end of the spread period.
From the above analysis of the graphs, we can provide some suggestions
about how to choose the best strategy when the following conditions are met:
the worm spreads with low speed and low cost of infection; the cost of the
patch is lower than the cost of infection; the cost of removal is lower than
the cost of infection.
Because the worm spreads slowly, defenders in the network have enough
time to notice the infection before the worm infects other computers. There-
fore, even if we use patch strategy, the infection does not increase a lot and
keeps the initial infection fraction.
If defenders use removal strategy, they can get highest benefit and all
infected computers can restore from the infection. Because the cost of this
strategy is lower than the cost of worm, defenders can play faster than the
spread of the worm.
36
Figure 4.3: The spread rate of Code-Red and security rates of three strategies.
Defenders can also use patch and removal strategy. Deploying this strat-
egy will pay more cost for each move, but the security rate is much lower
than that of removal strategy; therefore, defenders can get high benefit just
like in the removal strategy. What’s more, defenders are able to play faster
than the worm in this strategy, because the cost of this strategy is just a bit
higher than the cost of worm and the worm spreads with low speed.
4.2 SQL Slammer
SQL Slammer is the first real-world worm with high spread speed. It started
to propagate in January 2003. It exploits the “buffer-overflow” vulnerabili-
ty in computers running ”Microsoft SQL Server” or “Microsoft SQL Server
Desktop Engine (MSDE) 2000” [10]. SQL Slammer has no malicious pay-
load. Its payload is a small piece of code which produces a list of random IP
addresses and sends itself to those computers in the list. If the worm finds a
vulnerable computer among the list of IP addresses, it infects the computer
by exploiting the buffer overflow bug. After the infection, it starts to search
other computers in order to infect more computers. It spreads very fast be-
cause its payload becomes a UDP (User Datagram Protocol) packet with the
37
Figure 4.4: The final infected population.
header and goes to the UDP port 1434; then, it broadcasts scans and does
not require responses from the destination computers. It can drastically slow
down the internet traffic and disable data servers because of its high spread
speed. This worm resides in memory, so we can remove it by simply reboot-
ing the computer. However, rebooting cannot prevent reinfection when the
computer is online again. We should patch the computer to avoid reinfection.
In this scenario, we suppose that the homogeneous scale-free network con-
sists of 1000 computers, and each computer is running Microsoft Operating
System which includes Microsoft SQL Server. We take the average spread
rate of SQL Slammer from [24] (0.117). We set the maximum time of the
worm spread period as 100 seconds, 500 seconds and 500 seconds for patch
strategy, removal strategy, patch and removal strategy respectively. We sum-
marize the cost of worm proliferation and defender’s security deployments in
table 4.1 and 4.2 respectively.
By using the methods and models mentioned in the third chapter, we
compute and analyze four factors of each strategy. The overall benefit rate
and defender’s benefit rate are shown in figure 4.1 and 4.2 respectively; the
spread rate and security rates are presented in figure 4.3; the infected popu-
lation and change of infection are displayed in figure 4.4 and 4.5 respectively.
38
Figure 4.5: The change of infection.
Table 4.3: The cost of SQL Slammer.
Actions
Complexity
Total
Low:1 Medium:2 High:3
Exploit the buffer
1
2
overflow
vulnerability
Random scanning 1
In patch strategy, both benefit rates are less than zero for most initial
infections. The overall benefit rate decreases when the initial infection is
lower than 0.9; the defender’s benefit rate decreases when the initial infection
is lower than 0.75. Both benefit rates are lowest compared with benefit rates
of the other two strategies. The patch rate also reduces with the rising
initial infection and it is higher than the worm propagation rate when the
initial infection is less than 0.88. When the initial infection is high, the
patch rate becomes lower than the worm spread rate in order to cut down
the defender’s cost and increase the overall benefit rate. For each initial
infection, the change of the infected population is greater than zero which
means that the final infected population goes up compared with the initial
infected population, because patch cannot restore infected computers.
39
Table 4.4: The cost of security deployments.
Actions
Complexity
Total
Low:1 Medium:2 High:3
Patch
Detection 1
2
Patch 1
Removal
Detection 1
2
Reboot 1
Both
Detection 1
5Patch 1
Reboot 1
In removal strategy, the overall benefit rate keeps stable above zero. The
defender’s benefit rate increases steadily when the initial infection rises and
is higher than zero when the initial infection is greater than 0.2. The removal
rate has the similar trend with the patch rate. It keeps higher than the worm
spread rate for most initial infections such that the infection can not spread
very fast. When the fraction of initial infection is less than 0.68, the final
infected population keeps zero. It means that removal strategy clears the
worm before it spreads. When the fraction is higher than 0.68, the infected
population increases sharply. The infection can not be cleared but stays
in a stable level, because the initial infection is very high. For each initial
infection, the change of infected population is less than zero which means that
the final infected population goes down compared with the initial infected
population.
In the patch and removal strategy, the overall benefit rate decreases when
the initial infection is less than 0.75. The defender’s benefit rate decreases
when the initial infection is less than 0.7. When the fraction of initial in-
fection is less than 0.4, both benefit rates are highest compared with benefit
rates of the other two strategies. The reason is that when the infected pop-
ulation is small, it’s possible to control the infection spread effectively by
clearing the worm and patching the vulnerability. With the increasing initial
infection, the cost of the defender will increase, because the defender should
pay more cost to restore the infected population. So the overall benefit rate
and defender’s benefit rate decrease below zero. When the initial infection
is greater than 0.75, the overall benefit rate increases. When the initial in-
40
Figure 4.6: The overall benefit rate.
fection is greater than 0.7, the defender’s benefit rate also increases. The
security rate is lower than the spread rate for each initial infection, because
the cost of this strategy is higher than the cost of worm spread behavior. It
increases when the initial infection is less than 0.5 and decreases after that.
At the beginning, the fraction of infection is small, so the security rate keeps
low but can still clear the worm. When the initial infection grows higher, the
security rate decreases in order to control the defender’s cost and increase
the overall benefit rate. For each initial infection, the infected population
becomes zero no matter when defenders notice the worm and take actions.
From the above analysis of the graphs, we can provide several suggestions
about how to choose the best strategy when the following conditions are met:
the worm spreads with high speed and low cost; the cost of the patch is not
greater than the cost of infection; the cost of removal is not greater than the
cost of infection.
When the initial infection is small, if patch and removal strategy can
be deployed, defenders in the network can get the highest benefit and all
infection can be cleared; but they can not play faster than the worm, because
the cost of this strategy is higher than the cost of worm spread behavior.
When defenders notice the infection very late, they can also use this strategy,
41
Figure 4.7: The defender’s benefit rate.
because the benefit does not have large distance with the highest benefit.
What’s more, the worm can be cleared; otherwise, the infected population
will remain in the network.
If the defender can discover the infection and clear the worm much faster
than the worm proliferation, the worm is unable to spread its infection.
Therefore, the defender can use the removal strategy to clear the worm when
the number of infected computers is small.
Patch is the worst way to use when the worm begins to spread. However,
if defenders form a good habit of patching their computers every time the
patch is released, it will be the best way to prevent the worm.
4.3 Conficker
Conficker was first observed in November 2008. It exploits the “MS0–067”
vulnerability in the Windows Operating System to inject executable code
into Windows Server Service [19]. It probes new computers by generating a
list of domain names and choosing a subset of all domain names which are
42
Figure 4.8: The spread rate of SQL Slammer and security rates of three
strategies.
resolved to IP addresses by DNS resolvers. In order to prevent detection,
it has developed into several variants with the improved self-defense abili-
ty, such as removing the antivirus software. It has a great impact on the
network. It launches dictionary attacks on administrator passwords in order
to control infected computers remotely and form a botnet. Because of the
high complexity of its different variants, it’s much more difficult to detect
the infection. We should download the removal tool to clear the worm and
patch the computer to avoid the reinfection; what’s more, we need to restore
our computer by modifying our passwords.
In this scenario, we suppose that the homogeneous scale-free network con-
sists of 1000 computers, and each computer is running Microsoft Operating
System. We take the statistics of Conficker detection rates from [2] which
is shown in figure 4.11 and calculate the average spread rate (0.0741). We
set the maximum time of the worm spread period as 1000 seconds, 5000
seconds and 5000 seconds for patch strategy, removal strategy, patch and
removal strategy respectively. We summarize the cost of worm proliferation
and defender’s security deployments in table 4.5 and 4.6 respectively.
By using the methods and models mentioned in the third chapter, we
43
Figure 4.9: The final infected population.
compute and analyze four factors of each strategy. We present the overall
benefit rate and defender’s benefit rate in figure 4.12 and 4.13 respectively,
the spread rate and security rates in Figure 4.14, the infected population and
change of infection in figure 4.15 and 4.16 respectively.
In patch strategy, the overall benefit rate decreases when the initial in-
fection is lower than 0.9. It is higher than zero when the fraction of initial
infection is less than 0.32, and it becomes the lowest compared with overall
benefit rates of the other two strategies when the fraction of initial infection
is greater than 0.4. Defender’s benefit rate keeps stable below zero for each
initial infection and becomes the lowest when the fraction of initial infection
is higher than 0.5. The patch rate also reduces with the rising initial infection
and it is higher than the worm propagation rate when the initial infection
is less than 0.85. Because the cost of this strategy is lower than the cost of
worm and the initial infection is not high, the defender can play faster than
the worm. When the initial infection is very high, the patch rate becomes
lower than the worm spread rate in order to cut down the defender’s cost and
increase the overall benefit rate. For each initial infection, the change of the
infected population is greater than zero which means that the final infected
population goes up compared with the initial infected population.
44
Figure 4.10: The change of infection.
In removal strategy, the overall benefit rate increases steadily with the in-
creasing initial infection. It is the lowest when the fraction of initial infection
is less than 0.4. The defender’s benefit rate also increases when the initial
infection rises, and it is the lowest when the fraction of initial infection is less
than 0.5. The removal rate has the similar trend with the patch rate. For
each initial infection, the change of the infected population is less than zero
which means that the final infected population goes down compared with the
initial infected population. However, the final infected population does not
become zero and keeps a stable fraction for each initial infection.
In the patch and removal strategy, both benefit rates decrease when the
initial infection is less than about 0.65. When the fraction of initial infection
is less than 0.6, both benefit rates are highest compared with the other two
strategies. Although the cost of this strategy is much higher than the cost
of worm spread, it’s possible to control the infection spread effectively when
the infected population is small. The security rate is lower than the spread
rate for each initial infection. It increases when the initial infection is less
than 0.5 and decreases after that. For each initial infection, the final infected
population keeps zero at the end of the spread period.
From the above analysis of the graphs, we can provide several suggestions
45
Figure 4.11: Conficker Detection Rate Worldwide (from [2]).
about how to choose the best strategy when the following conditions are met:
the cost of worm spread is high; the cost of the patch is lower than the cost
of infection; the cost of removal is higher than the cost of infection.
In this case, the worm spreads not fast. The patch and removal strategy
is the best when the initial infection is not high. Defenders can gain highest
benefit and all infection can be cleared. Because the cost of this strategy is
much higher than the cost of worm, defenders can not play faster than the
worm. When defenders notice the infection very late, they can also use this
strategy if they want to clear the worm. Moreover, the benefit keeps above
zero and is similar to the highest benefit.
The cost of removal is higher than the cost of the worm. To control
the overall cost, the removal rate cannot be high. Therefore, the infected
population will decrease but stay in a stable level higher than zero.
Patch is still the worst way to use when the worm begins to spread.
46
Table 4.5: The cost of Conficker.
Actions
Complexity
Total
Low:1 Medium:2 High:3
Load DDL and exploit the
2
6
buffer overflow
vulnerability
Dictionary attack 1
Generate a list of domain
1
names via TLDs
Self-defense 2
Table 4.6: The cost of security deployments.
Actions
Complexity
Total
Low:1 Medium:2 High:3
Patch
Detection 3
4
Patch 1
Removal
Detection 3
7Removal 1
Restoration 3
Both
Detection 3
12
Removal 1
Restoration 3
Patch 1
4.4 Key Observations
From the above analysis, we have some key observations. In all cases, the cost
of using both patch and removal is higher than the cost of worm infection.
When the cost of removal strategy is not greater than the cost of worm
spread:
• If the worm spreads with high speed, the best strategy is to use both
patch and removal. Defenders can clear all infection and get higher
47
Figure 4.12: The overall benefit rate.
benefit rate; but, they can not play faster than the worm spread because
the cost of this strategy is higher than the cost of worm spread. If
the defender can discover the infection in the early spread period, the
defender can also use the removal strategy. Because the cost of this
strategy is lower than the cost of worm infection, the defender can play
faster than the worm spread, then the worm is unable to spread its
infection.
• If the worm spreads with low speed, the defender has enough time to
notice the infection before the worm infects other computers. The best
strategy is to use removal or both patch and removal.
When the cost of removal strategy is higher than the cost of worm:
• The best strategy is to use both patch and removal.
In both cases, which means that no matter what the cost of patch strategy
is:
48
Figure 4.13: The defender’s benefit rate.
• Patch is the worst way to use when the worm begins to spread, because
infected computers cannot restore. However, if the defender forms a
good habit of patching the computer every time the patch is released,
it will be the best way to prevent the worm.
49
Figure 4.14: The spread rate of Conficker and security rates of three strate-
gies.
Figure 4.15: The final infected population.
50
Figure 4.16: The change of infection.
51
Chapter 5
Evaluation
In this chapter, we review aims and objectives to discuss whether the project
has been completed successfully.
The first aim is to combine epidemiology modeling with game theory to
construct our computer models which are specialized to the defense against
malware problem in the computer network. At first, we investigated the
background knowledge of malware proliferation and epidemiology modeling.
Then, we studied the complex topology. We found that the homogeneous
scale-free network was the most suitable network, and we worked out the
way to combine it with epidemiology models by utilizing mean field approx-
imation. After that, we investigated the strategy making problem based on
the research of malware classification. We decided to analyze the random-
scanning and self-activated worms, and chose three security strategies, patch,
removal and both patch and removal. Therefore, combined with all above
analysis, game theoretical models were completed to simulate worm prolifera-
tion behavior when different strategies were deployed. After that, we studied
the “FLIPIT” game scenario in which the cost-benefit method is used to
determine the best defense strategy. We used the same method to work out
cost-benefit models. Then, we were able to find out the best rate of play
(the average number of computers with the security action) for each strat-
egy. As for the best strategy, we considered different initial infections, and
utilized game theoretical models and cost-benefit models to calculate four
factors which can determine the best strategy, including the overall benefit
52
rate, the defender’s benefit rate, the final infection fraction and the infection
change. Finally, we used Matlab to implement all theoretical models.
The second aim is to analyze real malware by utilizing computer models
and provide some advice on what security strategies should be deployed in
different malware scenarios. We chose three worms, SQL Slammer, Code-
Red and Conficker. They are all random-scanning and self-activated worms,
and they exploit the vulnerability which exists in the operating system to
infect the computer. Thus, using patch to avoid reinfection and downloading
removal tool to clear the worm are the most common way. Each worm has
its striking feature. SQL Slammer spreads very fast, and Code-Red spreads
slowly. For both worms, the cost of infection is low; defenders can use patch,
reboot or both patch and reboot strategy; the cost of either patch or reboot
is very low. Therefore, by comparing these two worms, we had some key
observations. Conficker is much more complex such that the cost of infection
is high. The cost of detection and restoration is also high. By analyzing
this worm and comparing it with SQL Slammer and Code-Red, we had other
useful findings.
A key factor to the success of this project was the reasonable and compre-
hensive workplan. For one thing, we allocated five weeks for the construction
of models and three weeks for doing data analysis. Each time schedule was
enough to guarantee the completion of the work. For another, we did the
risk analysis and contingency plan before we started to do the project. We
predicted several risks which could happen with high probability and worked
out corresponding plans to deal with such terrible situations. Therefore, the
project went smoothly during the whole development process.
The project dealt with the malware problem by using epidemiology mod-
eling and game theory. It showed how we combined models and methods of
these two areas to analyze malware proliferation behavior and to work out
the way to determine the best security strategy. It showed how cost-benefit
analysis could be valuable to guide the decision making. It also showed how
we carried out data analysis and decided the best deployment in different
malware scenarios.
53
Chapter 6
Future Work
When we designed theoretical models, we made some assumptions to simplify
the situation. Thus, in this chapter, we list some further work which can be
conducted to improve models and methods.
The first limitation is that we used the homogeneous network. In most
cases, the scale-free network is considered as the heterogeneous network,
because it consists of several highly connected hubs. In the real network,
hubs are usually routers and different from computers. Therefore, we can
develop game theoretical models by considering the heterogeneous network.
If we utilize the heterogeneous network, we can analyze more reasonable
network scenarios by dividing the network into the susceptible part and the
immunized part.
Secondly, we assumed that the infection behavior does not change in the
network during the whole spread period such that we can use the average
spread rate of the worm in models. However, the spread rate of the worm
changes during the whole propagation period. Different malware has different
trend of the spread rate. In our models, we can modify the constant spread
rate into dynamic one by adding parameters which vary with the time. Then,
we need to do more research on how to carry out cost-benefit analysis to find
out the best strategy.
In models, we analyzed random-scanning and self-activated worms and
54
assumed that all computers in the network are always online. This simplified
models, because we did not need to consider the route the worm spreads and
the time a human triggers the infection. In order to analyze various types of
malware, it is interesting to consider more factors which conform to the new
malware behavior, and fit them into models.
55
Chapter 7
Conclusion
We have constructed computer models, which are specialized to the defense
against random-scanning and self-activated worms. Three security strategies
have been utilized: patch, removal, both patch and removal. We have carried
out cost-benefit analysis and worked out the cost-driven method to determine
the best strategy. We have investigated three different worms with striking
features and got several useful findings. Although there is still much work to
do for further improvement, this project gives valuable guidance to analyze
malware proliferation problem.
56
Appendix A
We put key source code of the project here. Separate functions were written
to optimize the performance.
1. Generate the scale-free network (downloaded from the Internet)
function SFNet = SFNG( Nodes , mlinks , seed )
seed = f u l l ( seed ) ;
pos = length ( seed ) ;
rand (state ,sum(100? clock ) ) ;
Net = zeros ( Nodes , Nodes , single ) ;
Net ( 1 : pos , 1 : pos ) = seed ;
sumlinks = sum(sum( Net ) ) ;
while pos < Nodes
pos = pos + 1 ;
l i n k ag e = 0 ;
while l i n k ag e ˜= mlinks
rnode = ce i l (rand ? pos ) ;
deg = sum( Net ( : , rnode ) ) ? 2 ;
r l i n k = rand ? 1 ;
i f r l i n k < deg / sumlinks && Net ( pos , rnode ) ˜= 1
&& Net ( rnode , pos ) ˜= 1
Net ( pos , rnode ) = 1 ;
57
Net ( rnode , pos ) = 1 ;
l i n k ag e = l i nk ag e + 1 ;
sumlinks = sumlinks + 2 ;
end
end
end
SFNet = Net ;
2. Calculate the average degree distribution parameter (downloaded from
the Internet)
function average = SF FD( Net )
connect ions = s i n g l e (sum( Net ) ) ;
f r equency = s i n g l e ( zeros (1 , length ( Net ) ) ) ;
p l o t v a r i a b l e s = zeros (2 , length ( Net ) ) ;
P = [ ] ;
for T = 1 : length ( Net )
P(1 ,T) = T;
i f connect ions (1 ,T) ˜= 0
frequency (1 , connect ions (1 ,T) ) =
frequency (1 , connect ions (1 ,T) ) + 1 ;
end
end
for c = 1 : length ( f requency )
i f f r equency (1 , c ) ˜= 0
[X,Y] = find ( p l o t v a r i a b l e s == 0 ) ;
p l o t v a r i a b l e s (1 ,min(Y) ) = P(1 , c ) ;
p l o t v a r i a b l e s (2 ,min(Y) ) = frequency (1 , c ) ;
end
end
for d = 1 : length ( p l o t v a r i a b l e s )
58
i f p l o t v a r i a b l e s (1 , d ) == 0 & p l o t v a r i a b l e s (2 , d ) == 0
break
end
end
x = p l o t v a r i a b l e s ( 1 , 1 : d?1);
y = p l o t v a r i a b l e s ( 2 , 1 : d?1);
z = s i n g l e (sum( y ) ) ;
s = double ( 0 ) ;
% Ca l cu l a t e the average number o f connec t ions wi th
% the p r o b a b i l i t y o f d i f f e r e n t degrees
for i = 1 : d?1
k = double ( x (1 , i ) ? y (1 , i ) / z ) ;
s = s + k ;
end
average = s ;
3. Cost-benefit model in patch strategy
function [ g , f , s ] = COST BENEFIT PATCH(k , b , n , p , i , x , y )
k0 = x ; k1 = y ;
K = k ; beta = b ;
S0 = p ? (1? i ) ;
I0 = p ? i ;
% Ca l cu l a t e the maximum of the o v e r a l l b e n e f i t r a t e
f = @(gamma) S0 ? K ? beta / gamma + 2 ? I0 + k0 ? gamma
? k1 ? K ? beta ? 1 ;
[gamma, f v a l ] = fminbnd ( f , 0 , 1 ) ;
s = 1 ? S0 ? K ? beta / (gamma ? 2) ? I0 ? k0 ? gamma;
f = f v a l ;
g = gamma;
59
4. Calculate the final population when the network goes into the stable state
function n = FIND POP(S , l )
l en = l ;
s = zeros ( len , 1 ) ;
s (1 , 1) = ?1;
l en = len ?1;
for a = 1 : l en
b = a + 1 ;
d = abs (S(a , 1) ? S(b , 1 ) ) ;
i f d < 0 .0001
s (b , 1) = 1 ;
end
end
num = 0 ;
f lag = 0 ;
j = 0 ;
a = 1 ;
while a <= len
i f s ( a , 1) == 0
num = num + 1 ;
i f s ( a+1 ,1) == 1 && num > 5
j = a ;
a = len ;
end
end
i f s ( a , 1) == 1
num = 0 ;
end
a = a + 1 ;
end
n = j ;
60
5. Game theoretical model in patch strategy
function [T, S , I , R] = PATCH(k , b , g , n , p , i , t )
beta = b ; gamma = g ;
tmax = t ;
I0 = i ? p ; S0 = p ? (1 ? i ) ;
S = S0 ; I = I0 ; R = 0 ;
[T, pop ] = ode45 ( @Diff SIR , [ 0 tmax ] , [ S I R] , [ ] ,
[ beta gamma] , [ k ] ) ;
S = pop ( : , 1 ) ; I = pop ( : , 2 ) ; R = pop ( : , 3 ) ;
function dPop = Di f f S IR (T, pop , parameter , k )
beta = parameter ( 1 ) ; gamma = parameter ( 2 ) ;
K = k ;
S = pop ( 1 ) ; I = pop ( 2 ) ; R = pop ( 3 ) ;
dPop = zeros ( 3 , 1 ) ;
dPop (1) = ?beta ? S ? I ? K ? gamma ? S ? I ;
dPop (2) = beta ? S ? I ? K;
dPop (3) = gamma ? S ? I ;
6. Calculate four factors (which determines the best strategy) for each initial
infection in patch strategy
function sum = INITIAL INFECTION PATCH(k , b , n , p , t , x , y )
i = 0 . 0 2 ;
r = 1 ;
while i < 1
[ g , f , s ] = COST BENEFIT PATCH(k , b , n , p , i , x , y ) ;
[T, S , I , R] = PATCH(k , b , g , n , p , i , t ) ;
sum( r , 1) = i ;
sum( r , 2) = g ;
sum( r , 3) = s ;
sum( r , 4) = ?f ;
61
n = FIND POP(S , length (T) ) ;
sum( r , 5) = S(n , 1 ) ;
sum( r , 6) = T(n , 1 ) ;
n = FIND POP( I , length (T) ) ;
sum( r , 7) = I (n , 1 ) ;
sum( r , 8) = T(n , 1 ) ;
sum( r , 9) = I (n , 1) ? p ? i ;
n = FIND POP(R, length (T) ) ;
sum( r , 10) = R(n , 1 ) ;
sum( r , 11) = T(n , 1 ) ;
i = i + 0 . 0 2 ;
r = r + 1 ;
end
62
Bibliography
[1] The power law degree distribution of a scale-free network. http://www.
macs.hw.ac.uk/~pdw/topology/ScaleFree.html.
[2] S. Bortnik. Conficker by the numbers. Technical report, ESET Latin
America, February 2010.
[3] W Gong C. C. Zou and D. Towsley. Code red worm propagation mod-
eling and analysis. In 9th ACM Conference on Computer and Commu-
nication Security, November 2002.
[4] W. Gong C. C. Zou and D. Towsley. Worm propagation modeling and
analysis under dynamic quarantine defense. In The First ACM Work-
shop on Rapid Malcode (WORM), 2003.
[5] V. Capasso and G. Serio. A generalization of the kermack-mckendrick
deterministic epidemic model. Math. Biosci., 42:43–61, May 1978.
[6] W. Gong Ch. Zou and D. Towsley. Code red worm propagation modeling
and analysis. In CCS’02 Proceedings of the 9th ACM conference on
Computer and communications security, pages 138–147, Washington,
DC, USA, November 2002.
[7] C. Shannon D. Moore and J. Brown. Code-red: A case study on the
spread and victims of an internet worm. In Proc. 2nd ACM Internet
Measurement Workshop, pages 273–284. ACM Press, 2002.
[8] C. Gkantsidis et al. Planet scale software updates. In Proc.of ACM
SIGCOMM 2006, Pisa, Italy, 2006.
63
[9] C. Wong et al. Dynamic quarantine of internet worms. In Proc. IEEE
Int”l Conf. Dependable Systems and Networks, pages 73–82, 2004.
[10] D. Moore et al. Inside the slammer worm. Security & Privacy, IEEE,
1(4):33–39, August 2003.
[11] M. Mohd Saudi et al. Edowa worm classification. In S. I. Ao et al.,
editor, Proceedings of the World Congress on Engineering, volume I,
London, U.K., July 2008.
[12] S. Roy et al. A survey of game theory as applied to network security.
In Proceedings of the 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences, pages 1–10, Hawaii, January 2010.
[13] I. Hamadeh G. Kesidis and S. Jiwasurat. Coupled kermack-mckendrick
models for randomly scanning and bandwidth-saturating internet worm-
s. In Proceedings of 3rd International Workshop on QoS in Multiservice
IP Networks (QoS-IP), February 2005.
[14] C. Griffin. A note on the spread of worms in scale-free networks. IEEE
Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. Part B, 36(1):198–202, February 2006.
[15] Jay G. Heiser. Understanding todays malware. Information Security
Technical Report, 9(2):47–64, 2004.
[16] J. Jormakka and J. V. E. Molsa. Modelling information warfare as a
game. Journal of Information Warfare, 4(2):12–25, 2005.
[17] A. Oprea M. van Dijk, A. Juels and R. L. Rivest. Flipit: The game of
stealthy takeover. Technical report, RSA Laboratories, February 2012.
[18] R. Pastor-Satorras and A. Vespignani. Epidemic spreading in scale-free
networks. Physical Review Letters, 86(14):3200–3203, April 2001.
[19] D. Piscitello. Conficker summary and review. Technical report, ICANN,
May 2010.
[20] V. Paxson S. Staniford and N. Weaver. How to own the internet in your
spare time. In Proc. 11th Security Symp. (SEC 02), pages 149–167.
Usenix Assoc., 2002.
64
[21] G. Serazzi and S. Zanero. Computer virus propagation models. Per-
formance Tools and Applications to Networked Systems, pages 26–50,
Spring 2004.
[22] T. Tassier. Sir model of epidemics. Epidemics and Development Policy,
Fordham University NY, 2005.
[23] Henk-Jan van der Molen. Math on malware. ISACA JOURNAL, 3:40–
47, June 2011.
[24] M. Vojnovic and A. Ganesh. On the race of worms, alerts and patches.
Networking, IEEE/ACM, 16(5):1066–1079, October 2008.
[25] M. Minoura Y. Hayashi and J. Matsukubo. Oscillatory epidemic preva-
lence in growing scale-free networks. Phys. Rev., E 69(016112), 2004.
65
