Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
? 
Abstract 
This project started with the assumption that by integrating reinforcement learning algorithm 
and embedded vision algorithm, improved, intelligent robot performance would emanate. In 
fact, a robot commonly performs given roles in specific environments (In-Cheol, 2002). 
However, by adapting reinforcement learning algorithm, a robot could have a more 
autonomous and intelligent performance. To demonstrate, this project composed an 
embedded system using a mobile robot, camera and embedded board. The progress of the 
project was separated into two main components. The first is the introduction of object 
tracking and reinforcement learning algorithms. Within those algorithms, the project 
proposed the combination of colour tracking algorithm and K-mean clustering algorithm 
with added weight distribution for the object tracking process. Moreover, as the 
reinforcement learning algorithm varied Q-learning methods, it was supported through QL 
and MQL. Secondly, the project produced the programs using the above algorithms and tests 
based on them. The experiment following the program had various features of progress with 
different parameters such as learning rate, discount factor, and environmental conditions. As 
a result, the project offers support for the assumption that the robot showed improved 
performance through learning from past actions, despite limitations such as memory space 
shortage and error results. 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
? 
Acknowledgements 
Actually, for me, the period of doing the final project and dissertation has been meaningful 
but painful. During the whole period of fulfilling this project, there have been lots of 
challenges and difficulties, and I have needed to implement various ways to achieve my 
aims: sometimes, there was success, sometimes failure. But fortunately, with the help of so 
many people, I have finally accomplished my project. Here, I would like to say thanks to 
everyone. Firstly, I am so grateful to my personal supervisor, Dr. Walterio Mayol-Cuevas, 
who always supported me and gave me suggestions to solve the hardware problems. 
Moreover, I also want to give appreciation to Dr. Tilo Burghardt and Dr. Andrew Calway, 
both of whom gave me useful feedback on how to better accomplish my project. In addition, 
it is due to the help of Dr. Tim Kovacs in specific relation to „reinforcement learning? that I 
applied this aspect to my project. Furthermore, I also need to say thanks to my friends and 
classmates, because they encouraged me by offering their own opinions and suggestions 
which urged me to improve the quality of my project. Finally, I want to thank my family 
member who always loves me and support me. 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
? 
Table of contents 
 
Abstract  ? 
Acknowledgements  ? 
Table of contents  ? 
1. Introduction  7 
1.1 Overview 7 
1.2 Aims and objectives  8 
2. Theoretical background  10 
2.1 Embedded vision  10 
2.1.1. Object tracking  10 
2.1.1.1 Object representation  10 
2.1.1.2 Feature Selection  12 
2.1.1.3 Tracking using colour model  13 
2.1.2 Target position  14 
2.1.2.1 K-means clustering  14 
2.1.2.2 SVM (support vector machines)  16 
2.1.3 Measurement of the distance  18 
2.1.3.1 Measurement by using template  18 
2.1.3.2 Measurement by using filtered out pixels  19 
2.2 Reinforcement learning  21 
2.2.1 Basic concept of reinforcement learning  21 
2.2.2 Q-learning  22 
2.2.3 Modular Q-Learning(MQL) and Automatic Modular Q-Learning (AMQL)  22 
2.2.4 Adaptive Mediation based Modular Q-Learning (AMMQL)  24 
3. System configuration 26 
3.1 Beagle-board  26 
3.1.1 Operating system: Natty 11.04 of Ubuntu  26 
3.1.2 Booting Method: SD card (8GB)  27 
3.1.3 Camera: PS3 USB Camera  27 
3.2 Robot: IRobot create  28 
4. Robot programming  29 
4.1 Serial communication  29 
4.2 Robot movements  31 
4.2.1 Straight and turning movements  31 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
? 
4.3 Summary  34 
5. Embedded vision programming  35 
5.1 Object tracking  35 
5.2 Weight distribution to pixel data  37 
5.3 Measurement of the distance  38 
5.4 Summary  39 
6. Experiments based on reinforcement learning  40 
6.1 Program for the Q-learning  40 
6.2 Program for the MQL, AMQL and AMMQL  41 
6.3 Experiment conditions  43 
7. Analysis and Evaluation of results obtained by trial and error  44 
7.1 Use of the algorithms  44 
7.2 Changeable learning rate and discount factor  46 
7.3 Change of robot positions 48 
7.4 Limitations  48 
8. Conclusion  50 
9. Future prospects and potentiality in these fields  51 
10. Bibliography  52 
11. Appendices  56 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
7 
1. Introduction 
1.1 Overview 
Although video and robot technologies have seen tremendous leaps of progress in the 
past few decades (with the inclusion of motors, sensors and cameras) it is still 
difficult to create more autonomous and artificial intelligent humanoid or mobile 
robots, largely because of the current inability to apply varied algorithms to the 
system (Peters, Sethu, and Stefan, 2003). For this reason, the creation of algorithms 
which can lead to an improved system has received plenty of attention from 
developers and scientists. This is particularly the case in the field of embedded 
systems, where vision algorithms in combination with artificial intelligent theories 
have arisen as one of the most important areas of development.  
The development of embedded systems has always been connected to enhancing the 
quality of human life. Robots and mobile phones, for example, are part and parcel of 
our everyday life, and have been integrated into plenty of useful functions and 
attachments such as cameras and multi-touched screens. To achieve improved 
embedded system technologies, scientists and developers aim to integrate already 
existing technologies with new and creative technological developments. 
 
Figure 1 FIRA world cup, Source: http://www.fira.net 
The FIRA robot cup is a notable example of combination reinforcement learning and 
embedded vision. The FIRA (Federation of International Robot-Soccer Association) 
was established in June 1997 with the objective to promote the development of 
autonomous multi-agent co-operated robotic systems. It has supported developers 
who have attempted to improve Micro-Robots with varied theories. These theories 
were typically researched or invented by participants in advance of the competition. 
Under the guidance of FIRA, the participants began attempting to use „reinforcement 
learning? as a way of developing more intelligent robot movements (In-Cheol, 2002). 
Moreover, within various activities of robotic system, a number of improvements 
were suggested in order to integrate reinforcement learning into the embedded vision 
theories. There were a number of successful cases, particularly with attachments that 
used sensor technologies (In-Cheol, 2002).  
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
8 
In the case of embedded systems which have a time or spatial limit for the system 
configuration and performance, the participants have tried to solve the limitation and 
to improve their activities by using not only the embedded vision but also a diversity 
of beam sensors and Bluetooth technologies. In addition, combining different 
theories offered another alternative. One example was a solution that combined 
embedded vision algorithms and reinforcement learning without other attachments. 
Hence, these improvements offer potentially effective methods to solve current 
limitations and improve system functions.  
In fact, Asada M. and Noda H. (1996) designed an embedded robot by vision-based 
reinforcement leaning (Asada, Noda, Tawaratsumida, and Hosoda, 1996) and 
subsequently In-Cheol (2002) suggested the reinforcement learning approach, 
particularly in regard to the dynamic positioning of each robot agent in different 
environments (In-Cheol, 2002). Moreover, Arleo, A. and Smeraldi F. (2001) have 
delineated the hippocampus model configuration by using vision and reinforcement 
learning (Arleo, Smeraldi, Hug, and Gerstner, 2001).  
The positive results from these diverse of fields, as well as earlier studies and 
research; suggest that integrating reinforcement learning and vision algorithm offers 
a promising way to effectively improve system performance.  
 
1.2 Aims and objectives 
Under the assumption that integrating algorithms can improve system performance, 
this project attempts to effectively combine reinforcement learning and vision 
algorithms. In particular, the most important aim of this project is to adapt combined 
algorithms to an embedded mobile robot and to observe and analyze the resulting 
change in robot movements. 
In describing the main aim of this project, Figure 2 shows the general system 
configuration. 
 
Figure 2 system process & system configuration 
In addition, this project can be separated into two parts: general and specific aims. 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
9 
General aims 
- Composing an embedded system based on vision with a camera. 
- Composing development environment depending on the operating system to 
manage the whole system including board, camera and robot. 
- Reviewing embedded vision and reinforcement learning algorithms. 
- Adapting combined theories to the mobile robot, and testing resulting robot 
movements. 
Specific aims 
- Specific object tracking by using vision algorithms. 
- Accurate measurement of size and location of the object. 
- Adapting diversity reinforcement learning algorithms to the embedded mobile 
robot. 
- Handling a mobile robot movement by using serial communication. 
- Accurate measurement of the object distance by the use of image frame. 
- Comparison and analysis of reinforcement learning algorithms through observation 
of robot movements. 
 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
10 
2. Theoretical background 
To prove hypotheses through experiments that use attachments (such as a camera, a 
robot and an embedded board) it is necessary to have a certain amount of theoretical 
background knowledge. This knowledge should be related to the embedded vision 
for specified object tracking and reinforcement learning for the optimization of robot 
movements. In the first case, embedded vision using a camera necessitates that the 
robot needs to be able to distinguish and track specified coloured objects in an 
intricate environment. Moreover, the robot needs to be able to search for the object, 
as well as determine its size and location. In the second case, fundamental theories 
about reinforcement learning should be applied to the robot, so that it can potentially 
decide and make relevant movements for itself. In line with these aims, the next part 
will introduce the fundamental algorithms or theories for this project, specifically 
with regard to embedded vision and reinforcement learning. 
 
2.1 Embedded vision 
Embedded vision methods are of vital importance. They allow image availability of 
high quality to be obtained, including the ability to withstand an embedded system 
using an inexpensive camera: how to measure the shape of an object; how to handle 
images in order to obtain the object size; and how to position the image; all of which 
will be the main tasks of this project. Therefore, this area will introduce possible 
vision algorithms to effectively track objects and calculate the exact object size and 
position. As such, embedded vision is to include: object tracking, target position and 
the measurement of distance. 
 
2.1.1. Object tracking 
Object tracking is one of the important tasks within embedded vision fields of this 
project (Yilmaz, Javed, and Shah, 2006). Under the framework of a video frame 
analysis, it can be separated into three key steps: detection of moving objects, object 
tracking from frame to frame, and tracking object analysis in order to recognize 
moving object (Yilmaz, Javed, and Shah, 2006). The essential tasks in this project 
are thus to effectively and correctly detect the movement of specific objects. For this 
task, it is proposed that the main features for object tracking should include: template 
matching, colour, shape, edges, optical flow and texture tracking. 
 
2.1.1.1 Object representation 
In the object tracking method, an object can be represented as anything that is of 
interest such as colour, shape and optical flow (Yilmaz, Javed, and Shah, 2006). In 
addition, how to represent the object image information could stimulate changes of 
tracking algorithm. As a result, interpreting object representation forms part of the 
important background knowledge for image processing and object detection. 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
11 
Firstly, the object is represented as a single point (called the centroid) (Veenman, 
Reinders, and Backer, 2001) or as a few set of points (Serby, Koller-Meier, and 
Gool, 2004) such as (a) and (b) in Figure 3. It is generally suitable for object tracking 
to occupy a small tracking area in a camera image frame (Yilmaz, Javed, and Shah, 
2006).  
Secondly, the object can manifest its general shape as a rectangle or ellipse, such as 
(c) and (d) in Figure 3 (Comaniciu, Ramesh, and Meer, 2003). In fact, the precise 
tracking of motion in an image frame is not simple. Because of this, object motion 
can be generated into models by translation, affine or projective transformation. 
The third method is to define object contour region such as the boundary of an object 
(Figure 3 (g), (h). Moreover, there is a representation called a silhouette, which is the 
method to draw only the silhouette of the object with dots or line. Figure 3 (i), shows 
the example of drawing inside part of the object contour. These methods are useful 
for tracking the object which has complex non-rigid shapes (Yilmaz, Li, and Shah, 
2004). 
Fourthly, one of the methods that characterize object representation is the use of 
articulated objects, such as human and animal shapes. In addition, these shapes (such 
as the human body) are composed of torso, hands, feet, heads and legs connected by 
joints. This method can be described as the expression of the relationship between 
governed parts by using a model of kinematic motion, with ellipses or cylinders. 
(Figure 3 (e) (Yilmaz, Shafique, and Shah, 2003)). 
Finally, one of the representation methods termed „skeletal models?, can extract the 
adaptation of the transformations of medial axis to the silhouetted object (Ballard, 
and Brown, 1982). Generally speaking, the shapes of these objects can combine both 
articulated and rigid object models as in (f) in Figure 3 (Ali and Aggarwal, 2001).  
 
Figure 3 object representations: (a) centroid, (b) multiple points, (c) rectangular patch, (d) elliptical patch, 
(e) part-based multiple patches, (f) object skeleton, (g) complete object contour, (h) control points on object 
contour, (i) object silhouette (Ali and Aggarwal, 2001). 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
12 
In short, the interpretation of various representations offers a starting point for image 
processing in video frames. Because this project uses specified simple objects, 
objects characterized by point, rectangle and ellipse shapes are stable and effective 
methods. 
2.1.1.2 Feature Selection 
Correctly extracting the features of objects for image-recognition plays a critical role 
in the tracking process. Moreover, it can be argued that in a given frame, the most 
desirable point and unique property of the object will be how it is distinguished from 
the perceived other space of the object?s feature (Yilmaz, Javed, and Shah, 2006). In 
addition, the methods for the feature selection may have a deep relationship with the 
object representation; that is the reason why selecting the features can be used alone 
or in combination with object representation methods. For instance, coloured feature 
selection using a specific colour range based on a histogram of the image, could be 
said to incorporate colour appearance representation. Edges tracking method is also 
based on point or contour for object representation.  
Many algorithms for tracking commonly use the combined feature selection based on 
the object representation. The fundamental factors for feature selection which are 
used in this project include: colour, edges, optical flow and texture selections. 
The specific details of these features are as follows: 
* Colour 
There are two physical factors that influence the apparent colour of an object. These 
are: surface reflecting properties and the spectral power distribution of the illuminant 
(Yilmaz, Javed, and Shah, 2006). The RGB colour space is able to represent colour 
in image processing. Normally, however, the RGB is not based on colour space. 
Thus, it probably means that there is a difference between colours in the RGB space 
and colours perceived by humans (Paschos, 2001). In addition, the perceptual 
uniform for colour spaces, such as L*u*v* and L*a*b*, may not have to be 
completely correlated with each other, but the RGB dimensions are quiet opposite. 
For example, HSV of HSB (Hue, Saturation, Brightness value) is the approximate 
uniform of colour space. Because of this, the HSV colour spaces have vulnerabilities 
to noise and other external factors (Song, Kittler, and Petrou, 1996). As a result, it 
could not be argued that tracking by using colour space is extremely efficient. 
Furthermore, a diversity of colour spaces may be a useful method of selection which 
offers a great deal of possibilities in tracking. 
* Edges 
Canny Edge detector I is the most popular edge detection algorithm because of its 
simplicity and accuracy (Canny 1986). Usually algorithms trace object boundaries by 
using edges as the representative feature of the object. Object boundaries are 
probably one of the strongest factors by which changes and differences between 
different objects can be identified. With regard to recognizing edge features, the most 
important thing is that the algorithm is not easily influenced by illumination changes, 
when it is compared to colour features as noted above (Yilmaz, Javed, and Shah, 
2006). 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
13 
* Optical Flow 
Yilmaz (2006) states that an optical flow is a dense field of displacement vectors 
translating each pixel in an image region (Yilmaz, Javed, and Shah, 2006). To obtain 
the optical flow, the main feature is typically the brightness constancy, which 
corresponds to pixels in successive frames like a video (Horn, and Schunk, 1981). 
Commonly, the optical flow factors are used as a motion feature in dynamic motion 
segmentation and object tracking programs (Black and Anandan, 1996). Because of 
this, the optical flow is relevant for recognizing the direction of moving objects. 
* Texture 
Recognizing features with regard to textures commonly measures the intensity 
modification of a surface such as regularity or smoothness properties. When texture 
is compared to colour, there is one difference in the processing step, which involves 
the use of descriptors. With regard to texture descriptors, the various methods often 
include Law?s texture measures, wavelet and Steerable pyramids (Yilmaz, Javed, and 
Shah, 2006; Laws, 1980; Mallat, 1989; Greenspan, Belongie, Goodman, Perona, 
Rakshit, and Anderson, 1994).  
Law?s texture measures uses 25 masks obtained from 5 one-dimensional vectors, 
which stand for level, spot, wave, edge and ripple (Laws, 1980; Yilmaz, Shafique, 
and Shah, 2003). Wavelets decomposition, however, which includes specifically 
scaled and targeted information, can be attained through orthogonal banks (Mallat, 
1989). Finally, the steerable pyramids are composed by the wavelet-based function 
of over-complete type, which is directly derived from operators in different 
conditions, such as size or orientated information.  
In short, feature selection methods incorporate a number of factors: colour, edges, 
optical flow and texture. These are the fundamental factors in order to process 
images. 
 
2.1.1.3 Tracking using colour model 
As mentioned before, colour is one of the major factors for feature selection (Yilmaz, 
Javed, and Shah, 2006). In spite of changeable accuracy due to the brightness of 
environments, a colour-based extracting method can be used to track not only a non-
rigid object but also rigid human faces or motions. 
Generally, a colour-model can be obtained by a represented histogram of colours in 
the range of HSV (Hue Saturation Value) colour space. The HSV colour space is 
used in order to separate chromatic image data from shading part (Perez, Hue, 
Vermaak, and Gangnet, 2002). 
For this, tracking by using a colour model may need to use a rigid object which has 
firstly not too small a saturation capacity, and secondly, brightness value in HSV 
colour space. That is the reason why the colour information is reliable and sensitive 
to the smallest of difference in the colour values. Therefore, this method could be 
used as standard practice to ignore colour points under specific thresholds. Thus, 
these parts can be populated by a black or white colour.  
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
14 
When the pixel has satisfied the HSV values between two specific thresholds, the HS 
histogram can be generated as a graph composed of      bins and an additional    
value. Hence, the HS histogram for each pixel can be defined as             in 
such thresholds (Perez, Hue, Vermaak, and Gangnet, 2002; Perez, Hue, Vermaak, 
and Gangnet, 2002). 
In short, colour-based tracking uses the difference of the colours between specific 
thresholds in HSV colour space. In addition, each pixel in the range of the thresholds 
can be filtered by these thresholds and can remain as white or black states as well as 
grey level states. 
  
2.1.2 Target position 
The exact target position is an equally important part in measuring the distance 
between an object and the observer. Additionally, in order to calculate the position of 
the object in this project the tracking algorithm needs to be applied. However, as 
mentioned above, tracking colour based on non-rigid objects has weakness because it 
is extremely sensitive to noise. This means that recognizing coloured objects using 
HSV or RGB colour spaces is affected by the environments surrounding the object. 
For this reason, recognizing image information which allows for a high error rate is 
one way of developing more accurate object tracking. This part introduces 
classifications for pattern recognition and analysis. 
 
2.1.2.1 K-means clustering 
According to the classification of algorithms as suggested by MacQueen (1967), K-
Means clustering can classify object attributes or features into K number of groups 
(Teknomo, 2007; MacQueen, 1967). The K number is an integer type, and grouping 
can be done by using a K number. The cluster centroid and groups can be decided by 
minimizing the sum of the distance between data and the randomly chosen cluster 
within the grouping process.  
 
Figure 4 Flow chart of the K-Means clustering (Teknomo, 2007). 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
15 
As can be seen from the above flow chart, the steps of K-Means clustering are 
simple. Firstly, it is necessary to determine the number of clusters before assuming 
the random centroid of clusters. The next step is to measure the distance from the 
centroid cluster to each data (Cortes and Vapnik, 1995).  
Finally, the grouping process can be performed based on the minimum distance. 
Unless the program has a restraining condition to control infinite repetition, the 
process will be repeated unlimitedly. Because of this, if there is no change of the data 
in each group, it should possess a general alternative as it forces the process to stop 
within a few cycles of repetition (Chen, Luo, and Parker, 1998). 
The objective function for K-means clustering can be defined as follows. 
   ∑ ∑ ?  
   
   ?
 
 
   
 
       (1) 
Where ?  
   
   ?
 
is a calculated distance between a data point   
   
 and a randomly 
chosen centroid cluster    this indicates the sum of the distance from the chosen 
centroid cluster to each data point. 
 
Figure 5 examples to show how the points move into the centre 
As an example, Figure 5 above shows how the mean value  and   moves into the 
central area of data space (Chen, Luo, and Parker, 1998). Furthermore, it can be seen 
from the right side of Figure 5 that in each grouped space, the centroid cluster can be 
determined by the repetitive process which calculates the sum of the minimum 
distances between the centroid cluster and other data points in a group (Matteucci, 
2003). 
Despite the simplicity of using the K-means clustering algorithm, this method has the 
following weakness (Matteucci, 2003). Firstly, the initializing method for the means 
in each data could not be specified, which is to say that generally the samples of 
means are chosen randomly. Because of this, it is unable to determine the length of 
time it will take to decide final boundaries and centroid clusters. Furthermore, its 
results either frequently make sub-optimal partitions or one group reveals empty sub-
data (MacQueen, 1967). To solve this, many people commonly use different starting 
points, but this does not solve the problem perfectly (Matteucci, 2003). Finally, this 
process needs to decide upon a convoluted K number. For instance, while a video 
includes plenty of image frames and the noise of each image needs to be different. 
Thus, the process cannot decide on a fixed K number for K-Means clustering 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
16 
algorithm. Therefore, it needs a flexible change of K number depending on each 
image (Teknomo, 2007). 
In conclusion, the K-Means clustering algorithm is a potentially effective method for 
the classification. However, the K number can generate completely different results. 
As a consequence, this method requires the consideration of specific conditions 
depending on the particular settings of different data situations. 
 
2.1.2.2 SVM (support vector machines) 
In the case of an image obtained by an embedded camera, the image can be stored 
and termed as in a „state with plenty of noises?. Hence, sometimes, in classifying it 
by linear classification, the algorithm is limited (Cortes and Vapnik, 1995). 
Specifically, the data filtering by colour-tracking method is distributed over a wide 
range, and it includes similar points which can be found in the colour range of HSV. 
As a result, effectively distinguishing the data in reference to its exceptions, thus 
using the linear classification method with a margin in the SVM is advised. Because 
of this, the method will introduce the linear classifications of an SVM algorithm.  
As a linear classification, SVMs algorithm use the maximum margin, which was 
suggested by Cortes and Vapnik in 1995, in order to find the optimal boundary 
hyper-plane by using margin value within at least two classes (Bennett and 
Campbell, 2000; Meyer, 2009; Gunn, 1998). In addition, it is used to calculate the 
maximum margin value with the closest points on the support vectors boundaries. 
This process allows the mean value of the margin to be expressed as the optimal 
hyper-plane (Cortes and Vapnik, 1995). 
Figure 6 shows a simple example by using the linear classification. In this case, the 
optimal boundary can be defined as the furthest hyper-plane from each data group. In 
other words, it could be a hyper-plane passed between two data groups, and the 
closest vectors from the hyper-plane can be defined as the support vector. 
 
Figure 6 the best plane for the maximized margin (Cortes and Vapnik, 1995) 
Firstly, one separating hyper-plane can be formulated as follows, when   is a weight 
coefficient vector, and   is bias (Gunn, 1998). 
                     (2) 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
17 
As the distance between the training vector    and separating hyper-plane, the 
margin can thus express the following formula (Cortes and Vapnik, 1995). 
    ? ?      (3) 
Finally, the maximum distance between the support vector and optimal separating 
hyper-plane can be calculated by minimizing ? ?    within the quadratic program, 
as the following shows: 
      
 
 
? ?      (4) 
                       (5) 
However, the above case can only follow the methods of a linear classification, and 
so could have the errors demonstrated in Figure 7. 
 
Figure 7 hyper-plane with error of maximize margin 
However, these errors can be solved by adding weight to the quadratic program with 
the variable    for an error (Cortes and Vapnik 1995; Meyer, 2009; Gunn, 1998). 
        
 
 
? ?   ∑   
 
       (6) 
       {
              
            
    (7) 
Therefore, as the Lagrangian dual of the quadratic program, finding the closest data 
point can be summarized in the following total equation: 
    
 
 
∑ ∑             
 
   
 
     ∑   
 
      (8) 
       {
∑     
 
     
                
     (9) 
Besides this, there is also a non-linear SVM method. However, in the entangled case 
without specific characteristics which should use non-linear SVM, the case state 
could mean that the image obtained from the camera has attracted a large amount of 
noises or that the detected co-ordination could be wrong. Hence, the image 
information should be ignored. 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
18 
In conclusion, image data with plenty of noises is distinguished by introducing a 
linear soft margin in the SVMs algorithm. 
 
2.1.3 Measurement of the distance 
The method of efficient application of reinforcement learning is one of the most 
important tasks, and requires a method that can measure the exact distance between 
an object and a robot. However, a vision measurement based on exact distance 
values is difficult to achieve because of the impact of noise on the measuring 
methods. Therefore, a method based on this strategy should try to approach an 
accurate value by using an algorithm as specific as possible. To achieve this task, this 
part will introduce methods related to the measurement of distances. This includes 
such processes as: comparisons with the template images and the comparison of 
approximate object sizes by counting the number of filtered pixels. 
 
2.1.3.1 Measurement by using template 
A template matching algorithm is commonly used to detect an object (Hajdu and 
Pitas 2007). However, this has the possibility of measuring the distance to an object 
using a similar template matching method with the assumption that we can know a 
specific object size (Hajdu and Pitas 2007). The following figure shows general 
template matching process using correlations x, y. 
 
Figure 8 template matching architecture (Cole, Austin and Cole, 2004) 
The above template matching method can be used to measure the Euclidean distance, 
pixel by pixel if the template forms some part of an image. In fact, it is also possible 
to measure the distance to the object by using normalized cross correlation (Lewis, 
1995). However, it may be useful when an image includes plenty of similar object 
shape with template image. Because of this, we can think of another way of 
comparing template images with filtered object features, which can be similar to the 
template matching method. 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
19 
 
Figure 9 Distance measurement by using saved template 
The above figure describes the architecture of the measuring method by a 
comparison of a filtered object image and stored template image. In this case, the 
method should be used under the assumption that we know the distance   of 
template image size. The following formula summarizes the above process. 
{
       
   
   
 
    {
       
   
   
 
    (10) 
Where the distance of object is  , the distance can be calculated by the above 
proportional formulation. For this, however, it requires prior measurement for the 
template distance, as well as a fixed memory for the template image. 
 
2.1.3.2 Measurement by using filtered out pixels 
In another method, the object distance can potentially be approximately measured by 
calculating the number of filtered object image pixels. This method requires absolute 
accuracy for object detection but may be faster and easier than using the template 
method because it only compares the number of pixels. Thus, using the template 
method involves preparing a prior template image, and while comparing the number 
of pixels in an image can be used without preparation of templates, there is a 
considerable risk to disruptive elements such as noise and image brightness (Gupta 
and Pati, 2009). 
Typically, the „cvHoughCircles? function of the „OpenCV? library can approximately 
describe the filtered object size with circles by column and rows that include the 
number of lines detected as specified colour pixels (Intel Corporation, 2001). 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
20 
 
Figure 10 ‘cvHoughCircles’ function for Visual C++ in OpenCV libraries 
Source: http://www.emgu.com/wiki/files/1.3.0.0/html/0ac8f298-48bc-3eee-88b7-d2deed2a285d.htm 
However, the accuracy of this method actually relies on the image and the captured 
environment. The next figure shows the wrong measurement of the image size. 
 
Figure 11 example of unwise use of 'cvHoughCircles' function 
Source: http://cafe.naver.com/opencv.cafe?iframe_url=/ArticleRead.nhn%3Farticleid=9205& 
As can be seen from the above picture (2), the size of detected circles as shown in the 
two images is completely different. In this case, the colour of grey level may reveal 
serious similarity, indicating that the colours are too similar to distinguish. 
In short, the method using filtered pixels has an uncertain rate of accuracy, but its 
advantage is that it can readily adapt to the embedded system, so that its processing 
speed is very fast, and that it takes up a little memory space. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
21 
2.2 Reinforcement learning 
An embedded vision-based robot can be seen as an agent in reinforcement learning 
algorithm, however its recognizing range is limited. In spite of this, the robot should 
be able to repeat behavioral acts in real time. However, it is quite difficult to 
distribute commands considering the varied environments open to the robot. Because 
of this, the robot may need to find its optimal behavior by itself in reaction to 
different environments. 
In unspecified environments, adapting reinforcement learning is one of the most 
effective methods to optimize robot movement. In contrast to supervised learning, a 
reinforcement learning algorithm does not include specified representative inputs or 
outputs (In-Cheol, 2002).It could mean that the robot could approach the optimal 
action policy as distributing reward in specified tasks. For example, Mahadevan and 
Connel (1993) proposed reinforcement learning as a method of rapid task learning 
for real robots (Connel and Mahadevan, 1993). As a result, they observed successful 
performances in tasks involving goals such as carrying an object to an appointed 
location (Asada, Noda, Tawaratsumida and Hosoda, 1996). In such a scenario, we 
may assume that reinforcement learning can help improve robot movement. Thus the 
next part of the process will try to introduce reinforcement learning algorithms which 
can be adapted to robot movements. 
 
2.2.1 Basic concept of reinforcement learning 
Reinforcement learning can be defined as a learning method from which one or more 
agents can obtain optimal policy from rewards. This optimization is accumulated by 
distributing award or punishment to the agents in unspecified environments (Peters, 
Sethu and Stefan 2003; Dayan and Watkins 1992). As a goal-oriented learning 
method, reinforcement learning is characterized by the trial and error method, which 
involves delayed reward and interaction within environments. Generally speaking, 
with reinforcement learning the real performance of an agent is normally decided by 
following action policy   in the given state    (In-Cheol, 2002). After that, the 
reward about the real action, scalar value   , is supported to reward the agent, and 
then it will be changed to new state     . All of these above processes are 
subsequently repeated, and can be reflected by the following formula (In-Cheol, 
2002; Dayan and Watkins, 1992; Connel and Mahadevan, 1993; Ono and Fukumoto 
1996). 
                  
          ∑  
     
 
      (11) 
            
             (12) 
, where the discount rate is represented as  . 
In the first formula, the        represents a value function as a set of the value at the 
specific state   , which can calculate the expected reward with the sum of rewards 
following action policy  . The second formula defines optimal action policy   , and 
means that the value function can be optimized at every possible state (Watkins, 
1989).  
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
22 
2.2.2 Q-learning 
As one algorithm of value function estimation, Q-learning (Watkins, 1989) cannot 
have specific models. This means that Q-learning algorithm can mostly approach an 
optimised action policy without pre-selected specific state models if the learning 
process repeats infinitely or sufficiently. Because of this, it is possible for 
reinforcement learning to be adapted to this project. For the purpose of including a 
Q-learning algorithm, it requires the Q-value function to determine the action policy. 
Thus, the function to update Q-value is as follows (Ono and Fukumoto, 1996). 
                            [                                      ] (13) 
Where discount factor is   and reward is         from the state    and action   , the 
old value          can be obtained from the above formula. In this case, the discount 
factor   is between 0 and 1. Due to this the above formula can be rewritten as 
follows (Ono and Fukumoto, 1996; Kaelbling, Littman and Moore, 1996). 
                                         [                             ](14) 
In fact, however, the Q-learning algorithm could face real-world problems, where Q-
table is too large or complex. The reason is that Q-learning may not be converged to 
optimal policy for the action if the size of elements such as each state or action is too 
large to store at the Q-table (In-Cheol, 2002; Kohri, Matsubayashi, and Tokoro, 
1998). 
 
2.2.3 Modular Q-Learning(MQL) and Automatic Modular Q-Learning (AMQL) 
In a diversely changeable image environment, storing each state with real-world 
problems is one of the most difficult aspects of this project. To solve the above 
problem, it is suggested that diverse methods reduce the number of models in state 
environments by sub-dividing the stored elements of the Q-table (Kohri, 
Matsubayashi, and Tokoro,1998) Within them, one of the most effective methods is 
the Modular Q-learning algorithm developed by Whitehead (1990); Whitehead, and 
Ballard 1990; Ki-Duk, and In-Cheol, 2001). This algorithm uses a method in which 
agents are individually learned by using separate and fewer modules. Based on this 
process, the optimal policy is decided by combining the results that have been 
learned (Littman, Cassandra, and Kaebling, 1994). However, this method can be 
difficult to adapt to extreme changes in the environment because it also uses steady 
method called GM (Greatest Mass Strategy). The formula, which describes the 
greatest mass strategy, is as follows (In-Cheol, 2002).  
            ∑        
 
       (15) 
Where the present state is  , the optimal action value    is selected by a maximized 
sum of each module  , thus,   . The architecture of MQL is the next figure. 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
23 
 
Figure 12 Modular Q-Learning architecture (Ki-Duk and In-Cheol, 2001; Kohri, Matsubayashi and 
Tokoro, 1998). 
In addition to this method, Kohri (1998) suggested that AMQL (Automatic Modular 
Q-Learning) used in combination with MQL could offer an extended solution for 
mirroring real-world problems. The AMQL algorithm is one in which the agent 
makes suitable module groups by itself with respect to changeable environments 
(Kohri, Matsubayashi, and Tokoro, 1998).This method can be divided into three 
steps. The first is to compose each module selected from environmental factors 
which describe a state space. The second step is to evaluate the suitability of the 
modules depending on the level of contribution at policy, while it processes the MQL. 
Finally, the algorithm filters modules that have a lower suitability than the specified 
threshold in order to find an optimal policy, and then reconstructs a module group 
with the new selected environmental factors. This method is highly relevant for the 
agent which reacts quickly to changes in a diverse environment. However, this 
method may experience problems if it expects speedy effects to the embedded robot 
in real-time. This is because this process requires the use of extra learning tasks and 
time to decide the relevant modules (Kostiadis and Hu, 1999; Kui-Hong, Yong-Jae, 
and Jong-Hwan, 2001). 
 
 
Figure 13 AMQL architecture (Ki-Duk and In-Cheol, 2001; Kohri, Matsubayashi and Tokoro, 1998). 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
24 
In short, both MQL and AMQL are kinds of Q-learning methods that help to solve 
the state space problem of Q-learning. However, MQL when using fixed modules 
and AMQL when using unspecified modules still have weakness with regard to their 
efficiency and adaptability to diverse environments. Nevertheless, if this method 
efficiently reduces the number of modules, then the adaptation of MQL or AMQL to 
this project may not be a big problem. 
 
2.2.4 Adaptive Mediation based Modular Q-Learning (AMMQL) 
Beyond MQL and AMQL, it was suggested that an AMMQL based on the adaptive 
mediation might be a possible method to solve too big a Q-table (Ki-Duk and In-
Cheol, 2001). Typically, AMMQL has been used within robot soccer simulation 
which often needs to handle a great deal of information data in real time. In line with 
this, this project should also be able to handle plenty of image data within a 
changeable environment. Hence, using these techniques in this project may offer a 
possible solution for the real-world problem. 
In particular, the AMMQL is a method which dynamically determines the combining 
method of modules in order to adapt to a changeable environment rapidly and 
responsively. Moreover, the method supports higher adaptability to environment and 
achieves a greater efficiency with low cost than MQL (In-Cheol, 2001). The next 
figure shows the architecture of the AMMQL composed with   modules. The 
rewards from the environment depending on the agent?s actions are passed to each 
module and adaptive module. After that, the adaptive module judges Q-value weight 
based on the reward contribution of each module. Thus, it could be said that 
AMMQL uses a double learning structure. 
 
Figure 14 AMMQL architecture (Kohri, Matsubayashi and Tokoro, 1998) 
When each state before and after modularising pre-supposes as     S and 
              , the next formula represents optimal policy  
  which combines the 
weight with Q-value of each module. 
             (                         )          
   
∑            
 
  (16) 
In this case, the sum of each weight    is 1 (Ki-Duk and In-Cheol, 2001). 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
25 
Subsequently, each module can compare Q-value rate between    and possibly every 
policy with an obtained reward  .  
   
        
  
∑               
     (17) 
Where   is the learning rate, the temporal weight    can be calculated, and used as 
new weight through normalization, as follows. 
                  (18) 
    
   
             
     (19) 
As a result, with repetition of the above process, AMMQL can process modular Q-
learning, which adapts more sensitively to changeable environment, without a large 
amount of extra cost (In-Cheol, 2002; Ki-Duk, and In-Cheol, 2001). 
In this project, one of the biggest problems is how to control the size of the Q-table 
for each state. Therefore, using advanced AMQL or AMMQL methods may lead to 
more improved robot performance based on vision algorithm. 
 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
26 
3. System configuration 
A system?s development environment is one of the most important parts of a 
system?s configuration. Different development environments are able to express a 
diversity of development processes and consequences. For example, with regard to 
the specifications of memory, various attachments or MCU can display different 
capabilities such as varied system speed and image quality in the same software. In 
this respect, the following part will explain the essential factors for a system 
configuration, primarily as they relate to the Beagle-board and IRobot.  
3.1 Beagle-board 
 
Figure 15 Beagle-board xM Rev B (Tran, Gerdzhey and Ferwom, 2010) 
The main part in configuring an embedded system is choosing a stable board which 
can handle the demands of the whole system. As a powerful single board computer 
based on the Linux system, the Beagle-board has a number of attractive advantages 
and plays a pivotal role for the system (Tran, Gerdzhey and Ferwom, 2010). For 
example, it includes an essential proper form to support 4 USB host ports, Ethernet, 
Serial port, HMDI and SD card slot. Furthermore, by using a low voltage in the 
board it satisfies one of the conditions of a composite embedded system, which is 
that the Beagle-board must be able to manage all of its components with only a 5V 
external power supply (excluding the power demands of a robot (Osier-Mixon, M. J., 
2010).) Therefore, it could be said that the board is an adequate and effective system 
to replace the personal computer for the embedded system. 
After choosing the board device, this process requires the installment of an operating 
system and the setting-up of other attachments to make a complete system model. As 
such, detailed tasks will be simply explained; in particular, the following section will 
explain what operating system to choose, how to boot the board, and what kinds of 
camera will be used. Detailed explanations of the board interface can be found in the 
Appendices 1 section (Beagle-board.org, 2011). 
 
3.1.1 Operating system: Natty 11.04 of Ubuntu 
The operating system is able to influence the program by different compiling 
methods with libraries or controlling system kernels. The Ubuntu based on the Linux 
system, can provide three advantages for this project. Firstly, it makes the developer 
work under a GUI platform. Another thing is that the Ubuntu supports the varied 
versions with compatibility for embedded boards. Finally, controlling and updating 
system kernels are one of the biggest advantages of the Ubuntu. Moreover, with the 
Ubuntu it is easy to download essential applications and libraries as packages. One 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
27 
disadvantage, however, is that it needs to update to the latest version continually for 
smooth development. 
 
3.1.2 Booting Method: SD card (8GB) 
To boot the Beagle-board, the board supports three methods by using SD card, serial 
port by the RS-232 transceiver or Ethernet networking. However, because the board 
supports only one serial port, it could not use the port for both the serial 
communication with a robot and booting. Besides, the Internet should be considered 
in terms of using limited place. Because of these limited factors in the computing 
environment, the booting method by SD card was seen as the best option for this 
project. Booting with SD card has an advantage in that it is flexible in memory size.  
To boot the Beagle-board by SD card more than 2GB, it needs a special formatting 
process in order to select complex options correctly within the process, depending on 
the operating systems. In this case, because the operating system was chosen as the 
Ubuntu natty, it will describe the installing method related to the Ubuntu. 
Firstly, for the operating system of the Ubuntu or other Linux version, it needs to 
divide and format SD card simultaneously as two partitions under any operating 
system. The first thing is to create the FAT 32 space for system booting and 
transferring files from Windows (Beagle-board, “Linux Boot Disk Format). Another 
partition requires the root file system as the Linux partition. The FAT 32 partition 
does not demand big space, but it could be the general method which is to assign the 
space as approximately 63 sectors in the total 255 sectors. As another step for the SD 
card booting, after dividing partition and formatting, it needs to set up necessary 
booting factors directly for the mounting of a root file system for the Linux partition. 
Most important, the location of root priority, baud-rate for the communication and 
serial port name for the console are essential factors if the Linux and Ubuntu use U-
Boot as a boot-loader. However, it could be possible whenever setting up or 
changing those factors to other values. To sum up, the SD card booting method is as 
yet the most suitable and easiest method on the Beagle-board. 
 
3.1.3 Camera: PS3 USB Camera 
 
Figure 16 appearance of PS3 eye USB camera 
This project includes the main roles of obtaining and handling video stream in real 
time from camera. To use embedded vision algorithm, the essential process is the 
checking capability of the camera; this is the main reason why some products cannot 
be supported by drivers to recognize and work by the operating system. Because of 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
28 
this, the system needs to be checked by the driver after connecting the camera to the 
board, in order to establish whether the camera has a problem to input and output 
frames or not, because this factor may influence the total vision algorithms capacity, 
which could result in failure or inaccurate results. To sum up, for the checking 
process, two simple steps are required: firstly, check whether the operating system 
has a PS3 USB Camera module of a correct version by using a „dmesg? command in 
the terminal. Secondly, test the capability of image frames by simple media 
application such as „vlc?, „Cheese? or „Mplayer?. In this project, the „Mplayer? 
application was used to test and the device was mounted as „video0?. 
 
3.2 Robot: IRobot create 
Furthermore, in this project a robot is defined as having substantive existence by 
showing visual movements and standing up to the testing of integrated algorithm. 
Because of this, background knowledge about a pre-producing robot is essential for 
smooth robot performance to be exhibited. 
 
Figure 17 Appearance of the IRobot (IRobot Corporation, 2006) 
As demonstrated by the above basic figure. However, unlike its appearance, its 
usable functions vary as well as optional music play, Bluetooth or serial 
communication. 
To adapt this robot to the project, making movements and communicating with the 
main board will be the essential main tasks. Firstly, to make communication with the 
Beagle-board, a serial port name is required with the inclusion of baud-rate if using 
serial communication. In order to make a moving robot, the control of robot 
components such as motor and sensor need to be known. Fortunately, this project 
will not use the sensors to calculate distance between an object and a robot. Because 
of this, for the movement factor, it will focus only on how to control the servo-
motors and communication function. 
In the next „Robot programming? part, the essential robot interface requirements will 
be explained in detail, how to set serial port and motors, and program for the moving 
robot. 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
29 
4. Robot programming 
The following „Robot programming? part will include two large works of serial 
communication programming and robot movement programming. 
 
4.1 Serial communication 
Generally, serial communication is defined as a kind of sending signal method which 
can directly connect to computer components with various serial cables. Meanwhile, 
it can also send each 1 bit immediately through TX and RX. Here, the TX and RX 
can be seen as the Transmitter and Receiver Crystal (X-tal). Hence, to conduct the 
serial communication, firstly, it needs to examine the interface (or so called port) 
type, because this will affect the method setting as well as values (Kui-Hong, P., 
Yong-Jae, K., and Jong-Hwan, K., 2001; Axelson, J., 1998). 
In this project, the Beagle-board can support 9 pins mini DSUB RS-232, and the 
common usage of each pin number are summarized in the below table. 
 
Mini DSUB 
connector 
Signal title Simple using method 
1 CD(Data Carrier Detect) Input, not use 
2 RD(Receive Data) Input, connect to other TD 
3 TD(Transmit Data) Output, connect to other RD  
4 DTR(Data Terminal Ready) Output, not use 
5 SG(Signal Ground) Ground, connect to other SG 
6 DSR(Data Set Ready) Input, not use 
7 RTS(Request to Send) Output, connect to other CTS 
8 CTS(Clear to Send) Input, connect to other RTS 
9 RI(Ring Indicate) Input, not use 
Table 1 Pin number and signal of mini DSUB connector, and simple using method 
 
After examining the serial ports type, the name of mounted serial port name will be 
known. Thus use the relevant communication speed („baud-rate?) to connect to the 
system, as it will be easier to conduct the serial communication programming. 
However, the programming method can vary on different operating systems. For 
example, serial programming on Windows does not need to use the „termios? 
structure because the Windows can support and catch the serial port automatically 
when the serial port is linked with RS232 cable After examining the serial ports type, 
the name of mounted serial port name will be known. Thus use the relevant 
communication speed („baud-rate?) to connect to the system, as it will be easier to 
conduct the serial communication programming. However, the programming method 
can vary on different operating systems. For example, serial programming on 
Windows does not need to use the „termios? structure because the Windows can 
support and catch the serial port automatically when the serial port is linked with 
RS232 cable (libcreateoi, Create Open Interface Library, 2011; UNIX, 2001, 
“Specification, Version 2: <termios.h>”). 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
30 
Nevertheless, on the Linux environment, using the „termios? structure is imperative, 
because the project is based on Ubuntu. Thus the „termios? structure will support 5 
controlling modes of „input?, „output?, „control?, „local?, and „specific? (shown in 
Figure 18), and is defined as an interface standard by POSIX. 
 
Figure 18 ‘termios’ structure in <asm/termbits.h> 
This can check the mounted port name as „/dev/tty**?, and normally it can be 
mounted between ttyO0 and ttyO3 on the Beagle-board (Beagle-board.org, 2011, 
“Beagle-Board-xM Product Details). The simple code for the IRobot using 57600 
baud rate is as follows (IRobot Corporation, 2006). 
 
Figure 19 Simple source codes for the serial communication (libcreateoi, 2011) 
To summarize, the key point of the serial communication is to compose with the 
baud rate and device name mounted on the board. Those can be composed 
easily by using the ‘termios’ structure. 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
31 
4.2 Robot movements 
After setting the serial port, the achieved state will be ready for a moving robot 
through the bytes transmission of serial communication. However, before the robot 
programming, in order to avoid interference in the serial communication, the 
asynchronous serial communication needs to be considered. Hence, for preventing 
the interference, the effective way of using and controlling „multi-thread? is the 
standard practice (Powell, Kleiman, Barton, Shah, Stein, and Weeks, 1991; Mueller, 
1993; IRobot Corporation, 2006). Below the overall process of a robot program 
adopting multi-thread will be shown. 
 
Figure 20 flow chart of the robot performance 
This can be seen clearly in Figure 20. It is a simple flow of robot program using 
threads. In fact after setting the serial port, the robot will enter into a waiting state, 
which can be understood as the preparation state in waiting for the next command 
and movement. Hence, the following steps relate to both turning and straight 
movements, which have different processes in the robot program as follows: straight 
and turning movements. 
 
4.2.1 Straight and turning movements 
To test the example sources of the straight and turning movement, samples can be 
easily obtained through IRobot open interface library or other coding sites, such as 
„createoi.c? and „square.c? (IRobot Corporation, 2006). Figure 21 below can be seen 
as a „drive? function in the sample code called „createoi.c?. In the source code, 
through „drive? function, both „driveDistance? and „turn? function can be controlled, 
which in turn, can affect the straight and the turning movement. Besides, it is also 
possible to make movements directly through „directDrive? function that is different 
from the above mentioned functions. In fact, the example source of IRobot moving 
can not only support the straight and turning movement but also the controlling 
sensors. However, within the context of this project, it is unnecessary to use the 
censor control and make sounds. Thus the focus will be on the explanation of 
moving parts (libcreateoi, Create Open Interface Library, 2011). 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
32 
As to controlling the methods of robot movements, there are two ways: indirect and 
direct. Firstly, for the indirect control method, „driveDistance? is used with „turn? 
functions based on „drive? function which can control robot components with the 
serial communication of four data bytes. 
 
 
Figure 21 'drive' function in 'createoi.c' supported by IRobot interface library 
Source: http://libcreateoi.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/src/createoi.c 
The above Figure 21 shows the essential „drive? function to make straight and 
turning movements. To specify, the „drive? function uses a velocity for straight 
moving and radius for turning. The given range of velocity is between -500 and +500 
(mm/s), and the radius range is between -2000 and 2000 (mm). The negative values 
of the given velocity and radius can mean the backward and right side movements of 
the robot direction (libcreateoi, Create Open Interface Library, 2011). For example, 
in the given radius, -1 can make the robot turn in place clockwise, but 1 turns anti-
clockwise. In the case of 0, the robot recognizes it as a command for the straight 
movement. Therefore, the radius value at the straight movement should be 0. 
The following two figures, Figure 22 and Figure 23, are „turn? and „driveDistance? 
functions using „drive? function. These functions may support safe progress towards 
the goal, while incorporating the uses of „waitDistance? and „waitAngle? functions. 
Because of this, the robot can make stable movements similar to an asynchronous 
thread control. 
 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
33 
 
Figure 22 'turn' function in 'createoi.c' supported by IRobot interface library 
Source: http://libcreateoi.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/src/createoi.c 
 
Figure 23 'driveDistance' function in 'createoi.c' supported by IRobot interface library 
Source: http://libcreateoi.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/src/createoi.c 
 Another method directly manages the robot movements with „directDrive? function. 
As shown in Figure 24, the function is quite similar to the „drive? function, but it 
does not allow the performing of different commands at the same time. Thus, it is 
assumed impossible to make unsynchronized and malfunctioning situations 
(libcreateoi, Create Open Interface Library, 2011). 
 
Figure 24 'directDrive' function for direct robot control in the 'createoi.c' 
Source: http://libcreateoi.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/src/createoi.c 
To implement these codes to the robot, both of them basically need serial 
communication to send 5 bytes including one-byte operation code. The first byte 
should be an operation code, and other codes are composed by separated 16-bit 
signed values. Hence, it is in total 5 bytes as a one-byte operation code and each two-
byte velocity and radius value, as shown in Table 2. 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
34 
 
 
Command Sequence 
1 Operation code 
2 High byte of the velocity value 
3 Low byte of the velocity value 
4 High byte of the radius value 
5 Low byte of the radius value 
Table 2 Serial command sequence for the robot movement 
As a result, the overall robot program, which includes serial communication, can be 
illustrated as the following sample code (Figure 25). 
 
Figure 25 sample source code for the indirect control of IRobot movement 
Source: http://libcreateoi.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/samples/square.c 
4.3 Summary 
To compose the robot program, serial communication and hardware control of the 
robot is essential parts. Firstly, the serial communication program between the robot 
and board is composed by using the „termios? structure. Secondly, robot program can 
use an indirect or direct method. For the indirect method is to use the „drive? function 
through „driveDistance? and „turn? function, but direct method use „directDrive? 
function. Both of them seem to use similar programming architecture. However, 
indirect method might support more synchronized the serial communication than the 
direct method.  
  
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
35 
5. Embedded vision programming 
In this project, the camera plays the role of the „eye? of the robot. This means that an 
embedded vision program can decide on the direction of the robot movements. For 
this reason, the embedded vision programming, including the experiment algorithms 
can be separated into three parts: object tracking, weight distribution and 
measurement of the distance. 
 
5.1 Object tracking 
In standard practice, using the „OpenCV? library for the vision programming is 
considered to be the most useful method. In particular, it could be said that it is 
assumed suitable for the object tracking algorithms. The reason is that the „OpenCV? 
library supports a diversity of functions for the vision algorithms depending on the 
operating system and developing software. In addition, it continuously updates its 
version for the improved algorithms. Because of this, the object tracking part relies 
on the „OpenCV? library in this project. 
For the object tracking, the method using the HSV colour space can be divided into 
three steps. Firstly, the program for the object tracking needs to obtain an image 
frame through a camera. After that, in the case of using HSV colour space, the colour 
range for specific colour extraction should determine as „hsv_min? and „hsv_max? 
values. Finally, it checks and extracts the location and size with the colour range. 
The summarised process of object tracking part can check the following flowchart. 
 
 
Figure 26 flow chart of object tracking using HSV color space 
To specify the above Figure 26, in the „OpenCV? library, each image frame can be 
obtained by using „cvCaptureFromCAM? function, and the code as follows. 
 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
36 
 
Figure 27 Source code to obtain the image from the camera 
Thus, turning to the next step, it is necessary to set the colour range and filter out 
colours with it. To find the specific colour range, the colour table of window 
application or image colour histogram is usually used.  
The following table shows the examples of yellow and pink colour ranges in RGB 
colour space.  
HSV Pink Yellow 
HSV_min cvScalar 
(0,50,170) 
cvScalar 
(20,100,50) 
HSV_max cvScalar 
(10,180,255) 
cvScalar 
(30,255,100) 
HSV_min2 cvScalar 
(170,50,170) 
cvScalar 
(20,100,100) 
HSV_max2 cvScalar 
(255,180,255) 
cvScalar 
(30,255,255) 
Table 3 Color rage for yellow and pink color 
Finally, filtering out the specific colours in an image frame can be done easily by 
using „cvCvtColor?, „cvInRangeS? and „cvOr? function in „OpenCV? library. The 
„cvCvColor? function is to convert colour space to HSV colour space, and the 
purpose of „cvInRangeS?, is to find the colours in the range of colour space. With 
these two functions, „cvOr? function extracts original common colour into the 
changed image frames and original image frame. In this part, the reason for using the 
„cvCvColor? function is to filter colours in the HSV colour space.  
As a result, the „cv CvtColor? and „cvInRangeS? functions are assumed to be the 
basements before the filtering by using the „cvOr? function. The filtered example 
images by using HSV colour space are as follows. 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
37 
 
Figure 28 object extracting examples, when it used pink color range. 
As can be seen from Figure 28, the pink ball can be extracted easily by HSV colour 
space. However, using HSV colour space has a large amount of noise depending on 
the environment around the pink ball. In this project, normally it uses the pink ball to 
extract and track the colour. However, this way only had low accuracy of 40.34% on 
1000000 times in a complex environment, but averagely with 97.24% in a specified 
simple environment. Their basic source code can see in Appendices 2. 
In short, using „OpenCV? library is helpful for the realization of colour tracking 
method. However, colour tracking method relies on environmental conditions. 
Hence, colour tracking method should be used, based on the specified conditions to 
acquire more accurate results of the test. 
 
5.2 Weight distribution to pixel data 
Because of low accuracy within an experiment in a changeable environment, there is 
sometimes a great quantity of noises in the filtered images. In this case, 
distinguishing the original object point in the noises can be difficult. Because of this, 
filtered image data should be specified by using classification algorithms or 
distributing weight. As a result, this project wrote programs for the k-mean clustering 
program to separate out image data and flexible weight distribution code. 
For the first process, the program for K-means clustering should require the number 
of k clusters. Thus, it needs to be decided how many groups it divides before 
grouping image data. However, the number of k clusters might be flexible in this 
project. The reason is that we cannot know the amount of noises within filtered 
image data, and cannot predict it. Because of this, this project suggests that the 
default number of k clusters decides 2 and the k number should depend on the 
weights of the image data. The image frames from the camera follows 30 frames per 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
38 
one second in the above tracking program. Therefore, it was decided to check the 
position, size and robot movement through 90 frames for 3 seconds. Figure 29 shows 
centre positions of a drawn image, when it obtained frames during 3 seconds and 
filtered them.  
 
Figure 29 the examples of 90 frames obtained in Figure 28 
In the case of (3) and (4) of in Figure 29, it could not be known where the centre is 
co-ordinated in the original object. Because of this, the different weight adapted to 
each co-ordinate. If the data point includes any other data points in 10 by 10 pixels 
around it, its position will be distributed as (1), relevant to the highest weight. 
Moreover, if the data co-ordinates include more than 20 other data at the same point, 
it will be one of the cluster points used as K-mean clustering algorithm. As a result, 
the calculated number of data points is the K number in the program. 
Figure 30 shows the tested results based on filtering image data points by adapting 
K-mean clustering algorithm to weight distribution. 
 
Figure 30 results of combination k-mean clustering and weight 
In the case of (1) and (2), they do not need K-mean clustering because the number of 
clusters is only one. The K-mean clustering algorithm is to classify the data groups. 
Only the cases such as (3) and (4) can be required to use K-mean clustering and 
weight distribution. 
 
5.3 Measurement of the distance 
After checking the co-ordinates x, y of the object, the program for the distance 
between the object and robot could be written by using „cvHoughCircles? and 
„cvGetSeqElem? function in „OpenCV? library. The „cvGetSeqElem? has the 
function to extract co-ordinates information and the approximate object size which 
the data point has. Thus, using this function enables the possibility to calculate the 
distance through comparison between the original object size and the measured 
object size on image frame. 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
39 
As mentioned in 2.1.3.1, prior measurement is required for the object distance based 
on the specific model. In this project, the size of image frame is 640 by 480. Based 
on this condition, the distance approached to approximately          when the pink 
ball was used and its appearance was drawn as 50 by 50 pixels on an image frame. 
Hence, calculating a program to include the distance can be calculated as follows. 
 
Figure 31 the source code to calculate the object distance 
 
5.4 Summary 
In this project almost complete embedded vision algorithms were achieved by using 
„OpenCV? library. However, the performance included a quantity of noises 
contingent on changeable environmental conditions. In spite of this, the performance 
was able to overcome the impediments through added K-mean clustering algorithm 
and weight distribution. 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
40 
6. Experiments based on reinforcement learning 
For intelligent robot performance, it is necessary to add reinforcement learning 
algorithm to the embedded vision program. However, making a reinforcement 
learning program is not a simple process. In addition, the embedded system has 
limited memory space and the system speed is also quiet slow. Because of these 
reasons, effective use of memory space has to be considered, as well as suitable 
programming style. Thus it is now necessary to describe how to make the program 
for the Q-learning program. This will be demonstrated as one of the reinforcement 
learning algorithms, along with experiment processes which engage the adapted 
robot to the reinforcement learning program. 
 
6.1 Program for the Q-learning 
To adapt Q-learning algorithm to embedded vision, separation is needed in order to 
make Q-table and effectively determine Q-value action policy with Q-tables. First of 
all, Q-learning algorithm is based on the Q-table. For the Q-learning algorithm, there 
are lots of programs made by Java or Matlab languages. In Java and Matlab, it is 
possible to use hash table function which Java or Matlab supports. However, to make 
Q-learning algorithm in C language, it could be essential to make Q-table. The 
program for the Q-table can be composed of structure groups by using SLL (singly 
linked list) in this project instead of hash table. Furthermore, each structure describes 
each state, action, result, and reward.  
 
Figure 32 singly linked list for the Q-table 
The above Figure 32 shows how and with what each Q-table connects, and 
furthermore within the Q-tables is included a state structure, an action structure, 
results as an old state value, and reward value concerning the result. Furthermore, to 
handle each Q-table and a linked list of the Q-table, additional functions need to be 
included such as an appending function for the new states and a destroyer function in 
a linked list. Following Figure 33 is a Q-table part of a Q-learning program used in 
this project. The program includes the functions which control and not only the 
linked list but also each cell.  
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
41 
 
Figure 33 the functions to control linked list and each cell 
Another step in the reinforcement learning, is to determine Q-value for the optimal 
action policy with Q-table. As mentioned in 2.2.2, it is firstly necessary to set up the 
learning rate and discounting rate. Generally, the learning rate is set at 0.9 and the 
discounting rate set at 0.1 as between 0 and 1. After that, it is necessary to find the 
maximized Q-value of last states. Each Q-value of past states was stored as a result 
in the Q-table. By using these, an overall Q-learning program can be written and 
achieved, as shown in Appendices 3. In short, the programming for the Q-learning 
could be composed by using the „OpenCV? library and a singularly linked list of C 
language instead of the hash table.  
 
6.2 Program for the MQL, AMQL and AMMQL 
As mentioned in 2.2, use of modules in the Q-learning may have the purpose that Q-
learning could have effective decision and reduce the weakness of the real-world 
problems. Based on the purpose, how to compose modules with data in the Q-table 
could be one of the key points for the program of the MQL, AMQL and AMMQL in 
the Q-learning program (Ki-Duk and In-Cheol, 2001). Hence, this project attempted 
to divide the Q-table into three kinds of modules.  
Firstly, each module can be separated with co-ordinates of the object. The x, y co-
ordinates of detected object can be 3072006 (640*480) cases in an image frame. 
Composing Q-table with 3072006 cases might be heavy on the memory space and 
system performance. Thereby, the modular co-ordinates can manage in the Q-table 
as 48 parts. In addition, each part can follow the separated co-ordinates as follows. 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
42 
 
Figure 34 Modularization following separated co-ordinates 
Secondly, the modularization can be done by whether the robot can detect the object 
or not. Sometimes the robot may not find the object position when it had movements 
to wrong direction, which could not find the object, or error of the object detection. 
Thus, the Q-table considers of modules having distance 0 and others (Tan, 1993). 
Configuration of this modularization can compose as separates Q-table into 2 groups 
and following table shows the example. 
Module 1 
Result = 0 
Module 2 
Result ≠ 0 
[state] x, y [state] x, y 
[action] velocity, radius [action] velocity, radius 
reward reward 
Table 4 example of Modular Q-table 
The third method of modularization is to combine above two modularization 
methods. In addition, each module firstly can be divided by the co-ordinates, and 
then it stores modules depending on the result value.  
To sum up, dividing modules in MQL, AMQL and AMMQL is based on Q-learning 
program. However, the methods to modularise depend on the result of robot 
performance. Thus, the result of distance and co-ordinates can consider of the 
modularization methods 
 
 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
43 
6.3 Experiment conditions 
As is mentioned in the forthcoming sections, robot performance can be influenced by 
environmental conditions. In addition, the results might not be regular and the 
learning level is probably flexible. Because of this, to check the robot performance 
based on the reinforcement learning, this project basically separated out into 2 
conditions in order to observe robot performance at the same or in a random position. 
 
Figure 35 experiment conditions for the robot movements; left side of the picture is the condition 
which has fixed point as starting point of the robot, however right side has random starting point. 
The first condition of experiments is to set up an environment where the robot can 
obviously find the object, and its performance will always start at the same point. In 
this case, the object location should have a delicate difference between the object and 
the robot position. However, in this project it presumed that their locations are the 
same, and then it observed the learning process of the robot. However, on the right 
side of the picture in Figure 35, the robot can have a different position and start 
object tracking. In this case, their condition is only saved by the initial distance 
between the object and robot. Furthermore, this project assumes that the robot 
performance can also have different results following the changes of the learning rate 
and the discount rate parameters. In standard practice, the learning rate and discount 
value might be between 0 and 1. Because of this, the conditional rates had a 0.1 gap 
between 0 and 1, such as              . Finally, the experiment has to consider if 
the robot used each algorithm for the object tracking or not. This project suggested 
not only Q-learning or MQL, but also the weight distribution method. Hence, the 
experiment can process with or without algorithms for each part. 
In conclusion, the robot performance can be compared within the conditions which 
were divided by the starting points of the object and robot, including the different 
learning rate and discount values. Furthermore, it procedes with or without each 
algorithm for the object tracking and reinforcement learning. 
 
 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
44 
7. Analysis and Evaluation of results obtained by trial and error 
The main aim of this project has been to evaluate the combination of reinforcement 
learning algorithm and vision algorithms. To achieve this aim, this project has 
needed to prove the effectiveness of combined algorithms with the tested results of 
robot performance. In addition, to test the robot performance with added 
reinforcement learning algorithm, the robot was tested on average more than twenty 
thousand times. As a result, this aspect concerns the results with the training standard 
for the robot experiment. As mentioned above, the results will be described by 
following the order of the experiment conditions. Furthermore, most of them will be 
based on the reinforcement learning results. 
 
7.1 Use of the algorithms 
This part will be analysed and evaluated with the results concerning the robot 
performance when the robot uses the K-mean clustering algorithm, weight 
distribution or not. For the reinforcement learning part, the learning rate and discount 
value set up default parameter values as 0.9 and 0.1, and the robot started from a 
fixed position. As the first comparison tested with or without a K-mean clustering 
algorithm and weight distribution, the next figure shows the calculated distance 
based on vision results and robot movements. 
 
Table 5 compared results depending on use of K-mean clustering and weight distribution, when the 
brightness condition to track the pink ball was better than other places, before making robot 
movements. 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
45 
As can be seen from Table 5, the result at (b) shows the fixed co-ordinates and 
distance of the object, much more than (a) at the same position of the robot. Thus, 
the robot could not recognise the object position correctly in the (a) case. After all, 
the robot can have the wrong results in the performance. Hence, it could be said that 
using a K-mean clustering and weight distribution strongly influences the object 
tracking results. 
To show the more specific differences, the following Figure 36 explains the first 100 
times of the robot learning states, dependent on the use of the above algorithms. 
 
Figure 36 the distance results at robot learning; (a) is when a K-mean clustering algorithm is used 
with weight distribution, (b) is without these based on Table 5. 
As can be seen from the above figure, both (a) and (b) showed the irregular distance 
result following robot performance. In particular, (a) has a part where the distance 
value is 0. Thus, it might mean that the robot could not recognise the object shape, 
due to failure to extract an object colour in the image frames. In addition, the robot 
when programmed should perform randomly at the starting point, and specifically 
when the robot has 0 distance value. Because of this, in the case of (a), the robot 
shows random movement after 0 distance value. The above figure shows only 100 
times robot performances. However, actual robot movement normally runs more than 
20,000 times. As a result, whenever the situation in (a) occurs, it could not be said 
that the robot can learn from robot performance. Moreover, in the case of (b) it 
appears that its distance value approaches closely to optimal distance value. However, 
its change of distance value is unstable and fluctuated. In conclusion, using a K-
mean clustering algorithm and weight distribution might be helpful for the object 
tracking process as the first step is to learn from its performances.  
 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
46 
7.2 Changeable learning rate and discount factor 
The experiment results could be changed by the learning rate and discount value. As 
mentioned before, the learning rate and discount value is set up as 0.9 and 0.1. In 
addition, its regular change could decide how much the robot can learn from the past 
actions, rewards and past Q-values. Probably, these are useful to know the 
relationship between the conditions and robot learning performance, even if all of the 
robot performance engages in a changeable environment (Storey, 2003). For the 
comparison of the difference between learning rate and discount value, there are the 
changes of the Q-values and robot performances. This experiment was progressed on 
the fixed starting points, thus, the robot made performances to approach to about 
    . 
Firstly, to check the difference following the change of the learning rate, the learning 
rate decreased each 0.1 from 0.9 to 0.1. As can be seen from Figure 37, when the 
learning rate is 0.1, the distance which the robot checked could not reach a 
converged distance result. However, in the case where the learning rate is 0.9, we 
could see the narrow range of the distance change finally. This might mean the robot 
can learn from past performances. In addition, in the case of the learning rate 0.5, it 
may not distinguish the big difference between learning rate 0.1 and 0.5. Hence, 
when the learning rate is 0.9, the degree of the learning performance may be better 
than a low learning rate as demonstrated through the results.  
In fact, a higher learning rate is generally used for an indulgent action policy (Sutton, 
1996). However, the experiment in this project has a high error rate because of image 
noises and tracking methods. Because of this, it may not be said that a higher 
learning rate always leads to a better learning performance of the robot. As a result, 
the learning rate should be chosen through a great deal of experiments and it should 
be used flexibly. 
 
Figure 37 the distance results following the learning rate; when the learning rate is 0.1, 0.5 and 0.9, 
it shows the distance change following the robot performances. 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
47 
Secondly, comparing learning performance with different discount factors also has 
similar progress to the learning rate experiment based on the learning rate 0.1. Before 
the explanation of the result, the discount value could be defined by the decision 
factor on how much it adapts past Q-value for the new action policy (Littman, 1994). 
It probably means that learning performance can bring different results depending on 
the value of the discount factor. The actual result concerning the changes of the 
discount factor is demonstrated as follows: 
 
Figure 38 the results depending on different discount factor at fixed starting position. 
From Figure 38, the distance results, which are the following robot movements, 
could not distinguish easily enough to evaluate the difference between different 
discount values. In spite of this, the fluctuation of the distance factor 0.7 is less 
flexible at the discount factor than under discount factor 0.2. The reason may be that 
each new action policy could not correctly evaluate the past Q-values. As mentioned 
in the case of the experiment, based on the different learning rates, the object 
tracking result in this project could demonstrate the wrong result many times. In this 
scenario, the robot should always make a randomly new action performance. In 
addition, the robot with discount factor attempts to consider its optimal performance 
within the past Q-values, which are the Q-values when the robot could not recognize 
the object in an image (Tan and Weihmayer, 1992). However, the Q-values have 
different alternatives and rewards. Furthermore, it could be said that it was the 
optimal action policy. Therefore, choosing the higher value as the discount factor 
could make the wrong optimal policy for new robot movement. 
In conclusion, selecting a lower discount factor and higher learning rate strongly or 
weakly influences the result of the learning performance, but it need not be said that 
the parameter value is optimal for the performance. Therefore, the parameter values 
should be selected through plenty of repeated experiments. 
 
 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
48 
7.3 Change of robot positions 
Robot performances could be influenced by the starting position. The starting 
position of the robot performance could have the intention of how to decide the 
direction in which the robot will move. Thus, the robot may learn from a robot 
performance which has conditions such as fixed or random action states. As 
mentioned in 6.2, robot performances were tested on the fixed and random starting 
position. 
To evaluate those cases, the robot also has different results as follows: 
 
Figure 39 the results at the different starting point; the left side of figure is the result at the fixed 
starting point, otherwise right side shows the result when the robot moved at random starting 
point. 
As can be seen from Figure 39, when the robot started at the fixed starting point, the 
robot could approach the optimal distance result 20.23. Although its performance 
fluctuated at the beginning part, after 27 times of the robot performance the robot 
slowly started finding a stable distance and maintained its distance from the learning. 
Otherwise, in the random starting position, it may not be said that the robot had 
learned from its performance (Gullapalli, 1990).Furthermore, from the right side of 
the Figure 39, it can be seen that the robot frequently repeated random movements. 
The reason might be that the robot had lot of cases where the robot could not find the 
object when the distance values are 0. After all, the robot was not able to learn 
correctly from each of its actions when it started at the random point. Hence, it may 
be said that the robot learned when it progressed at the fixed starting point. 
 
7.4 Limitations 
From the experiment, it is possible to deduce the result of learning performance 
contingent on the different learning rate, discount factor and starting point for both 
robot movement and algorithmic object tracking. However, there were various 
limitations such as unlimited robot learning processes and low accuracy in object 
tracking.  
Firstly, there are a huge amount of environmental changes when recognising the 
object in an image frame. To track the object, the robot uses the co-ordinates of the 
object. In addition, the size of the image is 640 by 480, thus there are 307200 cases. 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
49 
As a result, the Q-table space, in order to create the object information might be 
required with at least 4915200 bytes. In fact, the memory size in the embedded 
system was not enough for every case depending on the changeability of the 
environment. Therefore, this project captured and analysed only the times when the 
memory of the robot program did not overflow. 
Secondly and similarly to above limitation, the robot required unlimited learning 
processes when the robot could not track the object correctly. In addition, when the 
robot could not track the object shape, the robot program handles the object distance 
as 0 and starts making random performance. Because of this, the robot sometimes 
could not learn from its performance. 
Thirdly, it was not easy to find a relevant learning rate and discount factor for the 
experiment. As mentioned before, the changeable environment brought unstable 
results. Because of this, it was difficult to find effective results from the robot 
performance. 
In short, while the experiment was progressing, there were various limitations such 
as memory shortage, changeable environment conditions and unstable results. 
Furthermore, this adversely affected the experiment results such as flexible distance 
value and not being able to reach the optimal distance. 
 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
50 
8. Conclusion 
This project started with the assumption of integrating reinforcement, learning 
algorithm and embedded vision algorithm in order to improve more intelligent robot 
performance. As influenced by the above assumption, this project suggested varied 
Q-learning algorithms and object tracking methods, with added K-mean clustering 
and weight distribution. Within the context of this project, the role of Q-learning 
algorithm was to learn from past action performances, while colour tracking added 
K-mean clustering and weight distribution which related to how to extract and track 
the specific object. Thus, these procedures have been explained by the theoretical 
background. Furthermore, this project demonstrated an embedded system including a 
camera, mobile robot and Beagle-board to illustrate how vision algorithm 
implemented reinforcement learning can make system performance more intelligent. 
In order to achieve its aims, by conducting an embedded system, this project was 
separated into three parts. Firstly, it comprised of hardware programming for the 
communication between basic hardware components. To exemplify, it needed the 
serial communication to transmit or receive the command between the board and 
robot. Hence, robot movement was composed of controlling servo-motors in the 
robot. Thus, the colour tracking method added the Q-learning, which was embodied 
and based on the hardware programming in C language. In the process for the 
tracking method, it used the „OpenCV? library. Based on these programs, the robot 
performances were finally tested with different parameters and experimental 
conditions, such as learning rate, discount factor, use of algorithms and different 
starting points. As a result, when the robot added K-mean clustering and weight 
distribution method it had a learning rate of 0.9 and a discount factor of less than 0.3, 
and started at the fixed position, thus revealing the results that the robot learned from 
past actions and therefore contained intelligent movement. 
However, the experiment had a few limitations in the project. For instance, memory 
space shortage and repeatable wrong object detection brought flexible and 
furthermore wrong results due to changeable environments. In spite of the limitations 
as observed, the robot learning performance in this project showed the possibility 
that the embedded vision system adapted through reinforcement algorithm could 
bring more intelligent performance. 
 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
51 
9. Future prospects and potentiality in these fields 
This project has progressed with a number of limitations within poor testing 
environments, and has presented the hypothesis that with the combination of 
reinforcement learning and vision algorithm, intelligent embedded robot 
performance is possible. Various embedded vision systems are deeply close to our 
life at present. For example, the video camera in the smart mobile phone currently 
has the function of an embedded vision algorithm (Dietrich and Garn, 2007). In 
particular, the convolutional face detector application in real-time has become one of 
the most popular applications on the mobile phone. The humanoid has attempted to 
adapt an effective embedded vision system in order to improve performance. Thus, 
in an effort to adapt reinforcement learning to embedded vision, better performance 
on the system has been attained. However, using reinforcement learning often 
consumes a huge amount of time to find the optimal action value, and includes the 
limitation of real-world problems. Hence, the effective alternatives for reinforcement 
learning including real-world problems and more accurate object tracking method 
will be one of the key points for future intelligent performance of the embedded 
system. 
 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
52 
10. Bibliography 
Ali, A., and Aggarwal, J., (2001), “Segmentation and recognition of continuous human 
activity”, IEEE Work-shop on detection and Recognition of Events in Video, pp. 28-35. 
Arleo, A., Smeraldi, F., Hug, S., and Gerstner, W., (2001),“Place Cells and Spatial 
Navigation based on Vision, Path Integration, and Reinforcement Learning”, Centre for 
Neuro-Mimetic Systems, MANTRA, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Lausanne, CH-
1015 Lausanne EPFL, Switzerland, pp.1-7. 
Asada, M., Noda, S., Tawaratsumida, S., and Hosoda, K., (1996), “Purposive Behavior 
Acquisition for a real Robot by vision-Based Reinforcement Learning”, Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, Boston, Machine Learning, 23, pp. 279-303.  
Axelson, J., (1998), “Serial Port Complete: Programming and Circuits for RS-232 and RS-
485 Links and Networks”, Lakeview Research, ISBN 0-9650819-2-3, pp. 1-10. 
Ballard, D., and Brown, C., (1982), “Computer Vision”, Prentice-Hall. Chap. 8. 
Beagle-board.org, (2011), “Beagle-Board-xM Product Details”, available: 
http://beagleboard.org/hardware-xM. 
Beagle-board, N.D., “Linux Boot Disk Format”, available: 
http://code.google.com/p/beagleboard/wiki/LinuxBootDiskFormat.  
Bennett, K. P., and Campbell, C., (2000), “Support Vector Machines: Hype or Hallelujah?”, 
available: http://www.sigkdd.org/explorations/issue2-2/bennett.pdf, SIGKDD Explorations, 
Vol. 2, Issue 2, pp. 1-13. 
Black, M., and Anandan, P., (1996), “the robust estimation of multiple motions: Parametric 
and piecewise-smooth flow fields”, Comput. Vision Image Understand. 63, 1, pp. 75-104. 
Canny, J., (1986), “A computational approach to edge detection”, IEEE Trans. Patt. Analy. 
Mach. Intell. 8, 6, pp. 679-698. 
Chen, C. W., Luo, J., and Parker, K. J., (1998), “Image Segmentation via Adaptive K-Mean 
clustering and Knowledge-Based Morphological Operations with Biomedical Applications”, 
IEEE Tran. Image process, Vol.7, No.12, pp. 1673-1682. 
Cole, L., Austin, D., and Cole, L., (2004), “Visual Object Recognition using Template 
Matching”, Australasian Conference on Robotics and Automation 2004. 
Comaniciu, D., Ramesh, V., and Meer, P., (2000), “Real-time tracking of non-rigid objects 
using mean shift”, In Proc. Conf. Comp. Vision Pattern Rec., pp. 142-149. 
Comaniciu, D., Ramesh, V., and Meer, P., (2003), “Kernel-based object tracking”, IEEE 
Trans. Patt. Analy. Mach. Intell. 25, pp. 564-575. 
Connel, J. H., and Mahadevan, S., (1993), “Rapid task learning for real robot”, In J. H. 
Connel and S. Mahadevan, editors, Robot Learning, chapter 5. 
Cortes, C., and Vapnik, V., (1995), “Support-vector network”, Machine Learning, 20, pp. 1-
25. 
Dayan, P., and Balleine, B. W., (2002), “Reward, Motivation, and Reinforcement 
Learning.”, Cell press, Neuron, Vol. 36, pp. 285-298. 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
53 
Dayan, P., and Watkins, J., (1992), “Machine Learning”, Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science, 
Vol. 8, Numbers 3-4, DOI: 10.1007/BF00992698, pp. 279-292.  
Dietrich, D., and Garn, H., (2007), “Editorial Embedded Vision System”, Hindawi 
Publishing Corporation EURASIP Journal on Embedded Systems, Vol. 2007, Article ID 
34323, doi:10.1155/2007/34323, pp. 1-3. 
Greenspan, H., Belongie, S., Goodman, R., Perona, P., Rakshit, S., and Anderson, C., 
(1994), “Overcomplete steerable pyramid filters and rotation invariance”, In IEEE 
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 222-228. 
Gullapalli, V., (1990), “A stochastic reinforcement learning algorithm for learning real-
valued functions”, Neural Networks, Vol. 3, Issue 6, pp. 671-692. 
Gupta, A., and Pati, K. A., (2009), “A Project Report on Finger Tips Detection and Gesture 
Recognition”, available: http://home.iitk.ac.in/~ashis/CS676Report.pdf, pp. 1-21. 
Gunn, S. R., (1998), “Support Vector Machines for Classification and Regression”, ISIS 
Technical report, university of Southampton, pp. 1-27. 
Hajdu, A., and Pitas, I., (2007), “Optimal approach for fast object-template matching”, IEEE 
Trans. on Image Processing 16, pp. 2048-2057. 
Horn, B., and Schunk, B., (1981), “Determining optical flow”, Artific. Intell. 17, pp. 185-
203. 
In-Cheol, K., (2002), “Design and Implementation of Robot Soccer Agent Based on 
reinforcement Learning”, Korea information processing society, Rev. 9-B, pp.139-142.  
Intel Corporation, (2001), “Open Source Computer Vision Library: Reference Manual”, 
available: http://developer.intel.com, chapter 14, pp. 4- 69. 
IRobot Corporation, (2006), “IRobot Create open interface Manual”, available: 
http://www.IRobot.com, pp. 9-13. 
Jarupan, B., N.D., “Introduction to Input/Output Interface”, available: http://www2.ece.ohio-
state.edu/xilinx/667/ECE667-doc/Lec/WK5/serial_rs232_usb.pdf, pp. 1-30. 
Kaelbling, L. P., Littman, M. L., and Moore, A. W., (1996), “Reinforcement Learning: A 
Survey”, Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 4, pp. 237-285. 
Ki-Duk, K., and In-Cheol, Kim, (2001), “Reinforcement Learning Approach to Agents 
Dynamic Positioning in Robot Soccer Simulation Games”, Korea simulation society, 
pp.321-324. 
Kohri, T., Matsubayashi, K., and Tokoro, M., (1998), “An Adaptive Architecture for 
Modular Q-Learning”, Journal of AI Research, pp. 1-6. 
Kostiadis, K., and Hu, H., (1999), “Reinforcement Learning and Co-operation in a Simulated 
Multi-agent System”, RoboCup-98: Robot Soccer World Cup II, Berlin, pp. 366-377. 
Kui-Hong, P., Yong-Jae, K., and Jong-Hwan, K, (2001), “Modular Q-learning based multi-
agent cooperation for robot soccer”, Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 35, pp. 109-122.c 
Laws, K., (1980), “Textured image segmentation”, PhD thesis, Electrical Engineering, 
University of Southern California. 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
54 
Lewis, J. P., (1995), “Fast Template Matching”, Vision Interface 95, Canadian Image 
processing and Pattern Recognition Society, pp. 120-123. 
libcreateoi, Create Open Interface Library, (2011), “Create Open Interface Library”, 
available: http://libcreateoi.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/. 
Littman, M. L., (1994), “Markov games as a framework for multi-agent reinforcement 
learnin”, eleventh international conference on machine learning, pp. 1-7. 
Littman, M. L., Cassandra, A. R., and Kaebling, L. P., (1994), “Learning Policies for 
Partially Observable Environments: Scaling up.”, Proceedings of the Eleventh International 
Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 157-163. 
MacQueen, J. B., (1967), “Some Methods for classification and Analysis of Multivariate 
observations, proceedings of 5-th Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and 
Probability”, Berkeley, University of California Press, 1:281-297. 
Mallat, S., (1989), “A theory for multi-resolution signal decomposition: The wavelet 
representation”, IEEE Trans. Patt. Analy. Mach. Intell. 11, 7, pp. 674-693. 
Matteucci, M., (2003), “A Tutorial on Clustering Algorithms”, available: 
http://home.dei.polimi.it/matteucc/Clustering/tutorial_html/kmeans.html. 
Meyer, D., (2009), “Support Vector Machines * The Interface to libsvm in package e1071”, 
Technic University Wien, Austria, pp.1-5. 
Mueller, F., (1993), “A library Implementation of POSIX Threads under UNIX”, In 
proceedings of the 1993 Winter USENIX Conference, available: http://www.informatik.hu-
berlin.de_tmueller_projects.html, pp. 29-41. 
Ono, N., and Fukumoto, K., (1996), “Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning : A Modular 
Approach,”, Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Multi-Agent Systems, 
AAAI Press, pp. 252-258. 
Osier-Mixon, M. J. (2010), “Booting Linux on the BeagleBoard-xM”, IBM developerWoks, 
pp. 1-14.  
Paschos, G., (2001), “Perceptually uniform color spaces for color texture analysis: an 
empirical evaluation”, IEEE Trans. Image Process. 10, pp. 932-937. 
Perez, P., Hue, C., Vermaak, J., and Gangnet, M., (2002), “Color-Based Probabilistic 
Tracking”, Computer Vision-ECCV 2002, LNCS 2350, pp. 661-675. 
Peters, J., Sethu, V., and Stefan, S., (2003), “Reinforcement Learning for Humanoid 
Robotics”, IEEE-RAS International Conference on Humanoid Robots, pp. 2-17. 
Powell, M. L., Kleiman, S.R., Barton, S., Shah, D., Stein, D., and Weeks, M., (1991), 
“SunOS Multi-thread Architecture”, In Proceedings of the USENIX Conference, pp. 65-80.  
Serby, D., Koller-Meier, S., and Gool, L. V., (2004), “Probabilistic object tracking using 
multiple features”, IEEE International conference of Pattern Recognition(ICPR), pp. 184-
187. 
Song, K. Y., Kittler, J., and Petrou, M., (1996), “Defect detection in random color textures”, 
Israel Verj. Cap. J. 14, 9, pp. 667-683. 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
55 
Storey, J.D., (2003), “The positive faslse discovery rate: A Bayesian interpretation and the 
Q-value”, Annals of Statistics, 31, pp. 2013-2035. 
Sutton, R. S., (1996), “Generalization in Reinforcement Learning: Successful Examples 
Using Sparse Coarse Coding”, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 8, 
pp.1038-1044. 
Tan, M., (1993), “Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning: Independent vs. Cooperative 
Agents”, In proceedings of the tenth International Conference on Machine Learning, 
Amherst, Masschusetts. Morgan Kauf-mann. 
Tan, M. and Weihmayer, R., (1992), “Integrating agent-oriented programming and planning 
for cooperative problem solving”, Proceedings of the AAAI-92’s Work-shop on Cooperation 
among Heterogeneous Intelligent Agents, San Jose, CA.  
Teknomo, K., (2007), “K-Means Clustering Tutorials”, available: 
http://people.revoledu.com/kardi/tutorial/kMean, pp. 1-12. 
Tran, J., Gerdzhev, M. and Ferworn, A., (2010), “Continuing Progress in Augmenting urban 
Search and Rescue Dogs”, Ryerson University, pp. 1-5. 
UNIX, (2001), “Specification, Version 2: <termios.h>”, available: 
http://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/007908799/xsh/termios.h.html. 
Veenman, C., Reinders, M., and Backer, E., (2001), “Resolving motion correspondence for 
densely moving points”, IEEE Trans. Patt. Analy. Mach. Intell. 23, 1, pp. 54-72. 
Watkins C.J.C.H. (1989), “Learning from delayed rewards”, PhD Thesis, University of 
Cambridge, England. 
Whitehead, S. D., and Ballard, D. H. (1990), “Active Perception and Reinforcement 
Learning”, Neural Computation 2, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, pp. 409-419. 
Yilmaz, A., Javed, O., and Shah, M., (2006), “Object Tracking: A Survey”, ACM Compute. 
Survey, 38, 4, Article 13 (Dec. 2006), pp.1-45. 
Yilmaz, A., Li, X., and Shah, M., (2004), “Contour based object tracking with occlusion 
handling in video acquired using mobile cameras”, IEEE Trans. Patt. Analy. Mach. Intell. 
26, 11, pp. 1531-1536. 
Yilmaz, A., Shafique, K., and Shah, M., (2003), “Target tracking in airborne forward 
looking infrared imagery”, Image and Vision Computing, 21, pp. 623-635. 
 
 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
56 
11. Appendices 
Appendices 1 Beagle-board Hardware details  
 
Source: http://beagleboard.org/hardware-xM 
Appendices 2pink ball filtering in an image frame. 
 
Source: http://www.aishack.in/2010/07/tracking-colored-objects-in-
opencv/ 
 
 
 
 
 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
57 
Appendices 3 
the program functions code for the Q-learning algorithm 
#include<stdlib.h> 
#include<stdio.h> 
#include<string.h> 
#include"createoi.h" //using basic source which irobot interface 
supported 
 
#definediscount_rate 0.1 
#define alpha 0.9 
 
typedefstruct _list{ 
 void *data; 
 struct _list *next; 
}u_list; 
 
// basic functions 
intu_list_count(u_list *root); 
u_list *u_list_get_last(u_list *root); 
u_list *u_list_append(u_list *root, void *data); 
u_list *u_list_new(void *data); 
 
//index :: start with 0 
u_list *u_list_get_at(u_list *root, int index); 
void *u_list_get_data_at(u_list *root, int index); 
 
// custom functions 
voidu_list_print_string(u_list *root); 
 
voidu_list_free_all(u_list *root); 
voidu_list_free_all_with_data(u_list *root); 
 
u_list *u_list_remove_first(u_list *root); 
u_list *u_list_remove_first_with_data(u_list *root); 
 
u_list *u_list_remove_last(u_list *root); 
u_list *u_list_remove_last_with_data(u_list *root); 
 
u_list *u_list_remove_at(u_list *root, int index); 
u_list *u_list_remove_at_with_data(u_list *root, int index); 
 
u_list *u_list_remove(u_list *root, void *target); 
u_list *u_list_remove_with_data(u_list *root, void *target); 
 
//structures for the Q-table 
typedefstruct _state{ 
int x; 
int y; 
}t_state; 
 
typedefstruct _action{ 
int velocity; 
int radius; 
}t_action; 
 
typedefstruct _cell{ 
t_state state; 
t_action action; 
 
double result; 
double reward; 
}cell; 
 
voidcell_add(t_state state, t_action action, double result, double reward); 
voidcell_clear(void); 
cell *cell_get(int index); //index start 0 
 
voidcell_all_plus_x(int _x); 
voidcell_all_plus_y(int _y); 
voidcell_all_plus_velocity(int _v); 
voidcell_all_plus_radius(int _r); 
voidcell_all_plus_result(double _result); 
voidcell_all_plus_reward(double _reward); 
 
doubleupdate_Q (double distance ,u_list *Q_table,int x, int y, intradius,int 
velocity); 
doubleobject_distance(doubleaction_policy); 
doublegetMaxQ(intx,int y); 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
58 
 
 
u_list *u_list_new(void *data){ 
u_list *t = (u_list *)malloc(sizeof(u_list)); 
memset((void *)t, 0, sizeof(u_list)); 
 
return t; 
} 
 
//get list count 
intu_list_count(u_list *root){ 
 int n = 0; 
 u_list *t = root; 
 
 if(t == NULL) 
  return 0; 
 
 while(t!=NULL){ 
  t = t->next; 
  n++; 
 } 
 return n; 
} 
//get last element 
u_list *u_list_get_last(u_list *root){ 
  
 u_list *t = root; 
 
 if(root == NULL) 
  return NULL; 
 
 while(t->next!=NULL){ 
  t = t->next; 
 } 
 
 return t; 
} 
//append 
u_list *u_list_append(u_list *root, void *data){ 
 u_list *dest; 
 u_list *t = (u_list *)malloc(sizeof(u_list)); 
 
 t->data = data; 
 t->next = NULL; 
 
 if(root == NULL) 
  return t; 
 
 dest = u_list_get_last(root); 
 dest->next = t; 
 return root; 
} 
 
u_list *u_list_get_at(u_list *root, int index){ 
 u_list *t = root; 
 
 while( (t != NULL) && (index >= 0)){ 
  if(index == 0){ 
   return t; 
  } 
  index--; 
  t = t->next; 
 } 
 return NULL; 
} 
 
void *u_list_get_data_at(u_list *root, int index){ 
 u_list *t = u_list_get_at(root, index); 
 if(t == NULL) 
  return NULL; 
  
 return t->data;  
} 
 
//u_list_remove_first 
staticu_list *_u_list_remove_first(u_list *root, intis_with_data){ 
 u_list *t = root; 
  
 if(root == NULL) 
  return NULL; 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
59 
  
 root = t->next; 
 if(is_with_data&& (t->data != NULL)){ 
  free(t->data); 
 } 
 
 free(t); 
 
 return root; 
} 
 
u_list *u_list_remove_first(u_list *root){ 
 return _u_list_remove_first(root, 0); 
} 
 
u_list *u_list_remove_first_with_data(u_list *root){ 
 return _u_list_remove_first(root, 1); 
} 
 
//u_list_remove_last 
staticu_list *_u_list_remove_last(u_list *root, intis_with_data){ 
 u_list *t = root; 
 u_list *t_next; 
 
 if(t == NULL) 
  return NULL; 
 
 if(t->next == NULL){ 
  if(is_with_data&& (t->data != NULL)){ 
   free(t->data); 
  } 
  free(t); 
 
  return root; 
 } 
 
 while(t->next->next != NULL){ 
  t = t->next; 
 } 
 
 t_next = t->next;  
 t->next = NULL; 
 
 if(is_with_data&& (t_next->data != NULL)){  
  free(t_next->data); 
 } 
 
 free(t_next); 
 
 return root; 
} 
u_list *u_list_remove_last(u_list *root){ 
 return _u_list_remove_last(root, 0); 
} 
 
u_list *u_list_remove_last_with_data(u_list *root){ 
 return _u_list_remove_last(root, 1); 
} 
//u_list_remove_at 
staticu_list *_u_list_remove_at(u_list *root, int index, intis_with_data){ 
 u_list *t = root; 
 u_list *t_next; 
 
 if(index < 0) 
  return root; 
 
 if(t == NULL) 
  return NULL; 
 
 if(index == 0){ 
  t_next = t->next; 
  if(is_with_data&& (t->data != NULL)){ 
   free(t->data); 
  } 
  free(t); 
  returnt_next; 
 } 
 
 if(t->next == NULL){ 
  if(is_with_data&& (t->data != NULL)){ 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
60 
   free(t->data); 
  } 
  free(t); 
 
  return NULL; 
 } 
 
 t = u_list_get_at(root, index-1); //prev 
 
 if(t == NULL) 
  return root; 
 
 t_next = t->next; 
 
 if(t_next == NULL){ 
  return root; 
 } 
 else{ 
  t->next = t_next->next; 
  if(is_with_data&& (t->data != NULL)){ 
   free(t_next->data); 
  } 
  free(t_next); 
 } 
 return root; 
} 
 
u_list *u_list_remove_at(u_list *root, int index){ 
 return _u_list_remove_at(root, index, 0); 
} 
 
u_list *u_list_remove_at_with_data(u_list *root, int index){ 
 return _u_list_remove_at(root, index, 1); 
} 
 
u_list *_u_list_remove(u_list *root, void *target, intis_with_data){ 
 u_list *t = root; 
 u_list *t_next; 
 if(root == NULL || target == NULL) 
  return root; 
 
 if(t->data == target){ 
  root = t->next; 
 
  if(is_with_data&& (t->data != NULL)){ 
   free(t->data); 
  } 
 
  free(t); 
  return root; 
 } 
 
 while(t != NULL){ 
  t_next = t->next; 
 
  if(t_next != NULL &&t_next->data == target){ 
   t->next = t_next->next; 
   if(is_with_data){ 
    free(t_next->data); 
   } 
   free(t_next); 
   return root; 
  } 
  t = t->next; 
 } 
 
 return root; 
} 
 
u_list *u_list_remove(u_list *root, void *target){ 
 return _u_list_remove(root, target, 0); 
} 
 
u_list *u_list_remove_with_data(u_list *root, void *target){ 
 return _u_list_remove(root, target, 1); 
} 
//======================list free=====================// 
staticvoid _u_list_free_all(u_list *root, intis_with_data){ 
 u_list *t = root; 
 u_list *bt; 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
61 
 
 while(t != NULL){ 
  bt = t; 
  t = t->next; 
  if(is_with_data&& (bt->data != NULL)){ 
   free(bt->data); 
  } 
  free(bt); 
 } 
} 
 
voidu_list_free_all(u_list *root){ 
 _u_list_free_all(root, 0); 
} 
 
voidu_list_free_all_with_data(u_list *root){ 
 _u_list_free_all(root, 1); 
} 
 
//*********** custom function ********// 
voidu_list_print_string(u_list *root){ 
 u_list *t = root; 
 intcnt = 0; 
 
 while(t != NULL){ 
  printf("%d :: %s\n", cnt++, (char *)t->data); 
  t = t->next; 
 } 
} 
 
staticu_list *head = NULL; 
 
voidcell_add(t_state state, t_action action, double result, double reward){ 
 
cell *c = (cell *)malloc(sizeof(cell)); 
c->state = state; 
c->action = action; 
c->result = result; 
c->reward = reward; 
 
head = u_list_append(head, c); 
 
return; 
} 
 
cell *cell_get(int index){ 
cell *ret = NULL; 
u_list *list = head; 
 
while(list){ 
ret = (cell *)list->data; 
 
if(index == 0){ 
return ret; 
        } 
index--; 
    } 
 
return NULL; 
} 
 
voidcell_clear(void){ 
u_list_free_all_with_data(head); 
head = NULL; 
} 
 
voidcell_all_plus_x(int _x){ 
u_list *list = head; 
while(list){ 
cell *c = (cell *)list->data; 
c->state.x = _x; 
 
list = list->next; 
    } 
} 
voidcell_all_plus_y(int _y){ 
u_list *list = head; 
while(list){ 
cell *c = (cell *)list->data; 
c->state.y = _y; 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
62 
 
list = list->next; 
    } 
} 
voidcell_all_plus_velocity(int _v){ 
u_list *list = head; 
while(list){ 
cell *c = (cell *)list->data; 
c->action.velocity = _v; 
 
list = list->next; 
    } 
} 
voidcell_all_plus_radius(double _r){ 
u_list *list = head; 
while(list){ 
cell *c = (cell *)list->data; 
c->action.radius = _r; 
 
list = list->next; 
    } 
} 
voidcell_all_plus_result(double _result){ 
u_list *list = head; 
while(list){ 
cell *c = (cell *)list->data; 
c->result = _result; 
 
list = list->next; 
    } 
} 
voidcell_all_plus_reward(double _reward){ 
u_list *list = head; 
while(list){ 
cell *c = (cell *)list->data; 
c->reward = _reward; 
 
list = list->next; 
    } 
} 
 
doublegetMaxQ(intx,int y){ 
 doubletmp=0.0;  
 
 u_list *list = head; 
while(list){ 
cell *c = (cell *)list->data; 
if(tmp<= c->result) 
  { 
   tmp = c->result; 
  } 
list = list->next; 
    } 
 
 returntmp; 
} 
 
doubleobject_distance(doubleaction_policy){ 
 doubledistance_reward; 
 distance_reward = robot_movement(action_policy); 
 returndistance_reward; 
} 
 
doubleupdate_Q (double distance ,u_list *Q_table,int x, int y, intradius,int 
velocity){ 
 doublereward_alpha; 
 doubleoldStateValue; 
 doublenewStateValue; 
 t_state *new_state; 
 t_action *new_action; 
 u_list *list = head; 
 cell *c = (cell *)list->data; 
 
 //find the last Q-value 
 while(list->next != NULL){ 
 
list = list->next; 
    } 
 oldStateValue = c->result; 
 
Jungsu Han, Machine learning and Data mining, 2011   
63 
 reward_alpha = object_distance(oldStateValue); 
 //calculate new Q-value 
 newStateValue = oldStateValue + 
alpha*(reward_alpha+discount_rate*getMaxQ(x,y)-oldStateValue); 
 //new state 
 new_state->x = x; 
 new_state->y = y; 
 //new action 
 new_action->radius = radius; 
 new_action->velocity = velocity; 
 //update cell 
 cell_add(*new_state,*new_action,newStateValue,reward_alpha); 
 
 returnreward_alpha; 
} 
